From everything I know now, I've
reluctantly come to the conclusion that
the COVID vaccine introduction has had a
catastrophic net negative effect on
society. And this is really most
disturbing and I've not been public
about this before, so I'm going to tell
you this for the first time.
Dr. Aim Malhatra is one of the UK's
leading celebrity heart doctors whose
influential research has sparked
important conversations about nutrition
and exercise and the healthare system.
The Times journalist called me and said,
"We've got [music] reports now of a 25%
increase in heart attacks in hospitals
in Scotland which are unexplained. What
do you think about the vaccine?" I was a
bit surprised. I said, "What do you
mean?" He said, "And to have that deep
knowledge and understanding gives me
very deep pain." And medical knowledge
is under commercial control. This
[music] is the root of the problem. The
system is psychopathic when it comes to
making money. And there [music] is so
much harm that comes from drug
prescriptions. One credible estimate
suggests the third most common cause of
death globally after heart disease
[music] and cancer is prescribed
medications. This is a dirty secret
within medicine. We should shift our
approach [music] to health from a
predominantly drug-based model within
healthcare to one which is more based
upon lifestyle. So what is that? The
first thing that needs to be done is by
2030 it's estimated that about 23.3
million people will die yearly because
of heart disease globally and there are
200 million people taking statins
[music] around the world. But the
increase in life expectancy with statins
over a 5year period, 4.2 days.
How do I prevent myself ending up on
either statins or having a heart attack?
This is really important information.
So,
quick one before we get back to this
episode. Just give me 30 seconds of your
time. Two things I wanted to say. The
first thing is a huge thank you for
listening and tuning into the show week
after week. It means the world to all of
us and this really is a dream that we
absolutely never had and couldn't have
imagined getting to this place. But
secondly, it's a dream where we feel
like we're only just getting started.
And if you enjoy what we do here, please
join the 24% of people who watch this
channel regularly and have hit the
subscribe button. Means more than I can
say. And if you hit that subscribe
button, here's a promise I'm going to
make to you. I'm going to do everything
in my power to make this show as good as
I can now and into the future. We're
going to deliver the guests that you
want me to speak to and we're going to
continue to keep doing all of the things
you love about this show. Thank you.
Thank you so much. Back to the episode.
[music]
Dr. Aim,
you're working on a documentary called
First Do No Farm, which will be out
shortly. Why did you choose the name for
your documentary, First Do No Farm?
Well, first and foremost, the credit to
that name actually goes to my
co-producer, Donal O'Neal, who's made a
number of health documentaries. Um, and
he's a former international athlete. Uh,
you know, and he used to work in
marketing and PR, so he's very good with
with slogans and sound bites. Um but it
it it totally resonated with with my
work and what I've been doing probably
for well over a decade which is to try
and shift um our approach to health from
a predominantly pharmacologicalbased
drug-based model within healthcare to
one which is more based upon lifestyle.
And that's because that's where the best
evidence is in terms of improving our
health but also in terms of managing the
health care system where there is so
much waste where drugs are
overprescribed and obviously first do
noarm means in the consultation room the
ideal scenario should be with every
patient that if there is a uh
non-drug-based way non-farmacological
way of managing their illness chronic
disease which is the big problem in
society right now on healthare systems.
Uh that should be the primary primary
approach. Um as well as highlighting
through the title that there is so much
harm that comes from drug prescriptions.
Just I mean this is something that even
brings gasps from audiences when I give
talks and lectures all around the world.
And whenever even I say it, I even think
bloody hell, how have we got to this
situation? That, you know, one credible
estimate suggests the third most common
cause of death globally after heart
disease and cancer is prescribed
medications. What your doctor prescribes
for you so-called appropriately.
mainly because the information which
doctors use to make decisions for
patients when it's prescribing drugs
invariably is based upon a gross
exaggeration on the safety and the
benefits of those drugs
and the phrase first do no harm which is
the original phrase that you've spanned
for the title where does that phrase
originate from
well actually it's one of the basic
principles of medical ethics you know as
doctors that's the something that's
almost we indoctr ated or ingrained with
whenever we you know practice medicine
treat patients um that should be the
that's at the forefront of our minds. It
should be at the forefront of our minds.
What what professionally what is your
professional title?
Um I'm a consultant cardiologist.
What does that mean if I
So I uh I special so I qualified as a
doctor um medical doctor in 2001. Um and
then after um becoming a um I I decided
after two or three years of doing my
sort of initial post-graduate basic
training in medicine to subsp
specialcialize in cardiology which is
basically everything to do with the
heart and then within that subsp
specialcialization of cardiology or
specialization of cardiology I trained
in interventional cardiology. Um in
layman's term Steve that means keyhole
heart surgery. So that's what I trained
to do.
[clears throat]
Um and I did that um uh you know up
until probably 2014 2015 and then I
shifted more towards a more holistic
approach to managing heart disease
especially looking at the science and
practicing the evidence base behind how
lifestyle changes can manage heart
disease and even potentially reverse it.
You must have seen a lot of hearts in
your time.
Yes. I I I think in terms of I was
thinking about this because you know up
until 2019 I was you know an NHS doctor.
We'll come back to later why what
happened in 2019 but and that's my
passion. Um but within the NHS which I
think trains doctors brilliantly um it's
a very high intense workload. Um and uh
just to give you perspective on that um
you know we have the highest uh capita
population per doctors in Europe. So
least number of doctors per uh
population in the country um and the
most number of doctors on night shift.
So it's quite intense and because of
that I was thinking back in terms of the
patients I would see on the wards and
the throughput and the people that I
would see you know in the what we call
cardiac catheter lab where we did the
diagnostic angagrams to visualize the
heart arteries and we put stances in
etc. Over my career I've probably
managed tens of thousands of patients.
Why did you choose to specialize in the
heart versus other parts of the sort of
medical um ecosystem that you could have
pursued? What was there something?
Yeah, I don't know if there's one answer
to that. I think one trigger very early
on in my life is um you know I grew up
in a medical family. Both my parents
were GPS and I had an older brother who
had Down syndrome
and uh which also meant he had a small
hole in his heart as well. And when I
was 11 and he was 13, shortly after his
birthday um he got a tummy bug. Uh
standard tummy bug. We didn't think
anything of it. Within 6 days, Steve um
he became breathless and rapidly
deteriorated. Got admitted to hospital
and had a cardiac arrest and died. And
later on it emerged his you know the
postmortem showed his heart was
massively enlarged and essentially had
something called viral myocarditis. It
can happen actually to anybody. You get
a a cold and in one in 10,000 people up
to one in 100,000 people. The body then
has what we call an autoimmune reaction.
instead of dealing with a cold on its
own, it then attacks the heart. And and
in a third of those patients, you can
basically who get that, they will
deteriorate and they will die. And so I
think for me that had such a profound
impact on my life. Um and with both
parents being doctors, of course, there
was a bit of there was no pressure from
my parents. They wanted me to, you know,
my dad wanted to be a cricketer. But,
um, I think that was implanted in my
mind that if I was to go into medicine,
I wanted to get involved in managing and
helping people, you know, or prevent
heart disease. So, I think that's where
it started from. It's interesting cuz
when we think about our health,
a lot of people think about the amount
of weight they have on them. They think,
you know, abdominal fat. They think
about how strong they are, their muscles
and things like that. Then a lot of the
other things are very superficial the
sort of measures of our health because
we've never really seen our heart and
it's similar to our brain because we've
never seen our heart or our brain we I
think we typically devalue the role that
they play in our over overall health but
when I was reading some stats around
heart disease and how how many people
die from heart disease I was shocked so
if we start there then can you give me a
sort of macro picture on why it's
important to keep our hearts healthy
and how um how many people are are dying
because of unhealthy hearts.
Yeah. So globally
um it's estimated and it's on the
increase by uh that certainly by 2030
it's estimated that about 23.3 million
people will die um yearly because of
heart disease globally right and that's
a huge number and and just to put it in
perspective it's the one of the leading
causes of premature death in European
men it is the leading cause of premature
death and uh and that's why I think it's
so important not just about people's
lives being cut short early. But also
there is an associated morbidity which
means the quality of life deterioration
that happens with people who are
diagnosed with heart disease that may
not be able to exercise very much
because they get pain in their chest
because of a blockage or they may
develop what we call heart failure where
the pump function of the heart is
affected [snorts] because of blockages
or because of a previous heart attack
they survived and therefore they can't
actually do the activities they want to
enjoy. And that's you know way bigger in
fact that's well sorry just as important
as as of course the the premature death
rate. So, no, it's a massive issue. And
it's interesting, Steve, that you you
mentioned um the image side where people
think about excess body fat and big
muscles and that kind of thing. And that
also plays into a certain culture and
mindset that I think detracts from us
actually addressing the root cause of
many problems with society today in our
health. Um which is not related to image
actually. It's about the the basics of
of uh reducing stress, about our social
interactions, etc.
um to some degree obviously what we eat
is linked to to how we look but um yeah
I mean absolutely I think it's not
something people really think about
enough um often until it's too late. How
does it impact women? Because we
mentioned it being the single biggest
killer of men, I think, in Europe, you
said. What about women?
It's um not as bad for women. And part
of the reason for that, Steve, is and
traditionally women on average will live
live up to 10 years longer than men,
right?
And the reason for that is that women
don't tend to develop heart disease um
at the same age as men. But after the
menopause, the rates of heart disease
actually start to catch up. So even
though women will live longer, it's
still a big issue with women as well.
Um, absolutely.
Your mother passed in November 2018
after a bout of sepsis.
The
interesting I read this quote you'd
said, I think it was on um on I news.
You said G you're a GP that had
dedicated 25 years of your life to the
NHS and ultimately you failed by it.
How were you failed by it?
In my mom's circumstance, what happened
was, you know, the system was under so
much strain. I mean, she had suffered
with a a debilitating rheumatoid and
osteoarthritis for many years.
Initially, I think a lot of her health
issues were rooted in her weight. I
mean, she was addicted to all to
processed food. She consumed a lot of
sugar. I grew up in a household where
there were just cakes and biscuits
everywhere. And, you know, she was a
very loving mom. Um, but I was addicted
to sugar probably because of that as
well for some time. But it affected her
health and I and and and I love my mom
very very dearly and it was
heartbreaking to watch her suffer slowly
over a number of years. But the way she
was failed by the NHS specifically is
[snorts] that um I had already been
campaigning for many many years in terms
of seeing how the system of the NHS was
being put under more pressure. a lot of
it by diet related disease and there
were so many opportunities for us to
that were being missed to actually
improve the system so that doctors could
provide quality care to every patient to
a good degree. When my mom was admitted
to hospital and she was sick with
infection in her spine, she'd become so
frail from her arthritis that her immune
system probably wasn't functioning
properly as well. because the hospital
was under so much strain because we had
not sorted out the root causes of the
pressure on the system. They missed a
heart attack for nine days. And it's
extraordinary, Steve. I remember I was a
they knew I was a cardiologist and it
was our local hospital. My dad was a
local GP and he was considered a medical
leader. I mean, he was loved and liked
and respected massively. So, even with
all of that, [snorts] um they did
everything they could to help her. But,
um she she went she became breathless
one day. They treated her for, you know,
um, uh, you know, for infection with
lots of fluid, etc. And, um, they
carried out a heart scan. It was
decided, let's do a heart scan on her.
But nobody actually looked at the result
of the heart scan and shared it with the
team because they were so busy they just
missed it. And I get sent the results 9
days later being asked, "What do you
think?" And I immediately noticed that
it was an echo. It was a heart scan
looking at the pump muscle of the heart
that part of the heart muscle wasn't
working well. I said, "She's had it.
You've missed a it was a a relatively
minor heart attack, but enough to cause
her to go into what we call heart
failure." And within 24 hours, fluid in
the lung, intensive care, went into a
coma, and that was it. So that was a was
a failing of the NHS, but not because of
the principles of the NHS, but because
the NHS um over the years, Steve, has
lost its um basic ability to care for
patients because the principles of the
NHS have not been upheld.
For anyone that isn't aware, the NHS
means National Health Service, which is
the health service and system um within
the UK. the the I mean just a few years
later your father passes in July 21 from
a sudden unexplained heart attack at 73
years old. Um
I mean so there's three members of your
family that have ultimately
um died as a result of or closely linked
to heart attacks. Your immediate family.
Yeah. Yeah. Um yeah to some degree. Yes.
All related to the heart. All related to
the heart.
Was your father's heart attack avoidable
in your view? If you think about the
lifestyle choices and things like that
that you you talked about your mother
there, was that avoidable any in any
sense of the word?
Yeah. Interesting. Um so there are two
components to my dad's um death. Um
strictly the the postmortem findings
didn't reveal a heart attack per se, but
for all intents and purposes it can be
seen that way. So, um, the first thing
that happened was, um, my dad, by the
way, was a very fit man for his age, 73
years old. Um, played badson every week.
Um, had a bit of high blood pressure,
but had got that better controlled after
quitting sugar, partly because of all my
campaigning. Uh, and he listened to me
and he was very into eating healthy
food. In fact, you know, I consider
myself to be extremely fit. I'm obsessed
with exercise. Um, you know, I played a
lot of competitive sport when I was
younger, partly because of him. And uh
it was very unexpected when he called me
up. It's coming up to his anniversary,
July 26, 2021.
Uh and he said, "I seem I've got some
chest discomfort." And uh I asked him,
you know, to describe it. In medicine,
80% of your diagnosis, if you're a good
doctor, comes from the conversation. So
the way he described his chest
discomfort was a central heaviness going
to his shoulders. So immediately think
this is heart. And I said, "You need to
call an ambulance." He was a bit
reluctant to call an ambulance for
whatever reason. And then I said, "Okay,
I was in London. He was in Manchester.
That's where I grew up. And I decided to
go and have a shower, get ready, and get
on the train." And he was ringing up his
uh neighbors who were both doctors. And
by the time I came out of the shower, I
called him back and there was no answer.
And I remember my heart just thinking, I
really hope he's not had a cardiac
arrest. It just I thought, "No, this is
this can't be can't be what's going on."
Kept ringing ringing. And eventually
um the neighbor who was a doctor who
knew me, she answered the phone and
said, "Seeam, your dad's had a cardiac
arrest. We're doing CPR in him." I know
from national data and I've even written
about this in the BMJ. The average
response time, Steve, for for for many
many years, one of the things uh that we
do have done very well in the NHS, some
of the best in the world, is our
treatment of heart attacks and the speed
of treatment and even cardiac arrests. I
knew the average response time was 8
minutes. I said, "The ambulance will be
here in 8 minutes." because of the
timing almost certainly he will have
what we call a shockable rhythm as in um
the heart is probably in in a having a
electrical disturbance and we'll be able
to shock him out of it more than 50%
chance he will survive this is I'm
thinking already like this
10 minutes pass by hasn't shown 20
minutes nothing 30 minutes um they get
there and I FaceTime them they attach a
cardiac monitor it's a flatline he's
gone nothing to be done and of course
that was, you know, at that stage I was
obviously devastated and I I wrote in
the eye newspaper about how I I screamed
louder than ever screamed in my life.
But to come back to that situation first
and foremost so the first thing is if
the ambulance had turned up on time
almost certainly it's likely he would
have survived. That's the first thing.
But the second thing in my mind is why
has he had a cardiac arrest in the first
place? He was a really healthy guy in in
my family as in on his side there was no
family history of heart disease. He had
high blood pressure. Okay. But that was
about it, right? And he was otherwise
pretty good.
And when the postmortm came back, there
were three major arteries of the heart.
Two of them had severe blockages. And I
thought, "This is odd because I knew his
lifestyle. This is my area of interest
and expertise, heart disease
specifically, how it progresses, how you
can reverse it, all that stuff, what
medications can do, what they can't do
as well." And I thought to myself, hold
on, I knew his scan from a few years
earlier. Something has happened in the
last 2 or 3 years that has caused a
rapid acceleration in the disease of the
heart, right? In terms of the blockages
getting very rapidly, you know, um, uh,
progressing. And I thought, this doesn't
this this doesn't make sense. And I
thought to myself, was he just severely
stressed? Like stress can do it. Very
severe stress can do it. He'd lost
obviously my mom a couple of years
earlier, but he was a very resilient
guy. He was a vice president of the
British Medical Association. He was
still involved in medical politics
during COVID. He was one of the faces on
the BBC during the COVID pandemic
talking about, you know, how we should
manage this, etc. So, he was still very
mentally active. He wasn't a recluse
sitting in the corner, you know, he was
still social. So, doesn't really fit.
And then a publication appeared in the
journal circulation which is considered
a ver the premier cardiology journal and
a cardiologist called Steven Gundry who
you may have heard of. He's done a lot
of work in lifestyle and lectins and
stuff. So he he had and he actually had
a very senior role in the American Heart
Association very eminent published
cardiologist. he published um an
abstract where he had looked at several
hundred of of his patients who had taken
the COVID vaccines specifically mRNA
vaccines so either Fiser or Madna two
doses and what had happened was within 8
weeks of taking those jabs
their baseline risk went from 11% chance
of a heart attack in 5 years to 25%
chance just within 8 weeks that is a
huge jump. Like just to give you
perspective, Steve, if I today decided
that I was gonna just consume junk food,
all my meals, right? I was going to
smoke 20 cigarettes a day. I was going
to stop exercising. I wouldn't get
anywhere close to increasing my risk
within 8 weeks. And the mechanism was
through inflammation. And I thought, ah,
I know heart disease is a chronic
inflammatory condition. Think it's a
lifestyle. So if this is even partially
true, it means that the co vaccines may
be causing inflammation around the heart
and that means that many people are
going to have an acceleration in heart
disease and that may explain what
happened to my dad. But that was only
one bit of data. Of course, a good
scientist knows, okay, it gets you
thinking. It's a hypothesis potentially.
Obviously, there's some data, but it's
not enough to be make it more than
likely at this stage. And within two
weeks, call it providence or whatever
else, um I got a phone call from uh
somebody who I know, I consider him uh
you know, one of the smartest
cardiologists, very high integrity from
very prestigious institution.
And he called me up and he said, "Asim,
I've got something to tell you. I'm very
upset." He said, "A group of researchers
that I'm linked to in this institution
um had accidentally found, and this is
nothing to do with blood tests or
cardiac risk, through an a very
high-tech imaging of the heart modality
they were using, that there was
inflammation of the arteries, which
would cause obviously potentially heart
attacks. That was there in the
vaccinated, but not there in the
unvaccinated. The lead researcher sat
the team down and he said, "Guys, I just
want to make this clear. We are not
going to explore these findings any
further because it may affect our
funding from the drug industry."
[snorts] Now, obviously, people hearing
this are going to think, "Wow, that is
sounds corrupt. Um, this is something
that has been a big problem within
medicine for a very, very long time,
which isn't getting an airing." But it
didn't surprise me of that. But it was
still quite shocking. But for me at that
stage, Steve, it was okay, at the very
least, I should ask the question. And I
was nervous about it. I had been someone
took the jab myself. I went to Good
Morning Britain and very early on when
they were just offering it to
high-risisk people to say that um I
think that this is probably safe and
people shouldn't be worried. And this
was again specifically to address people
from black and ethnic minority
communities because there was a lower
uptake amongst those communities. Partly
also because they often amongst some of
the most marginal is marginalized
members of society and they have less
trust in authority in government. So you
can see how the psychology plays in
there and I convinced a friend of mine
who's a film director Ginda Chada who
directed um Bendit like Beckham. You
might know some of her movies and we
went on together in Good Morning Britain
to say listen I think this and you know
this is fine. So I had all of that and
so I was in many ways I was
indoctrinated and and there is you know
and people don't like to admit they're
wrong or think they've got it wrong. So
for me to start turning or changing my
mind or asking the question um is not
necessarily an easy thing to do but I've
done that throughout my career. So you
know if anyone has the um character you
I know myself to be able to say listen
okay there's new evidence here or
whatever else I felt I could do that but
I was still nervous and I thought you
know this is not something that I think
the BBC are going to pick up on. I had a
good rapport um with GB News at that
point um and I still do and one of the
presenters Alexander Phillips was a
friend of mine and I called her up and
said listen um you know we were doing
she wanted me on anyway I was doing
regular health slots every few weeks I
said what I see what do you want to talk
about next week and I said I think let's
talk about this said okay go on GB news
I say you know the vaccine committee of
the country should look into this this
is what I know this is what I found
whistleblower all this stuff I my dad
died as well and this may be the reason
for his death. And I just asked that
question and of course I didn't expect
it to go viral. You know, it got
millions of views and it was getting
reach all over America and that kind of
thing. Strangely, by this point, Steve,
I don't know if you remember, but
Omicron wave had started and um we were
getting reports from South Africa, which
was really reassuring that from the
doctor that discovered it that this
doesn't seem to be more harmful than the
flu. Now, great. Okay, it's mutated.
It's a different strain. This is really
great news. And then Saja Javad around
the same time the secretary for health
had come out in parliament and said we
are now going to pass through
legislation that the COVID vaccine needs
to be mandated for healthcare workers
despite the fact that the British
Medical Association Medical Colleges
we've never in our country one thing
that's really good especially within the
medical establishment we don't believe
in mandating any drug. They do this in
America. They've never done this here.
And although they weren't very vocal
about it, they kind of were a bit
relatively quiet. They weren't
supporting it openly saying that we
should mandate. This was coming from
this political decision. I thought this
is very odd. At a stage now where we're
thinking there's serious harm, we know
it's not. And by that stage, 2021,
November, most people were understanding
now it wasn't stopping infection, right,
for most people, right? So I said, this
doesn't make any sense. So I then
started campaigning on this issue. And I
started campaigning on this issue. was
able to get into the mainstream news on
this particular issue because around
that time um the I newspaper had
published an investigation into the
delay that led to my dad's death of the
ambulance service right and I had also
got privy to knowledge in that you know
in that story that the deputy chief
nurse of NHS singing had called me up
and said there had been basically a
cover up by the government and the
department of health to stop people
knowing for months there were ambulance
delays doctors and members of public I
thought this is unacceptable. So I
exposed this. It became a massive story
BBC news and when the BBC presenter
saying Dr. Mahhatra what's going on
wrong with the NHS why is it failing why
is this happening? I said it's
multiffactorial but I said one of the
most important reasons is you failed we
failed for years to address the root
cause of what's driving stress on the
system taking on the excesses of big
food and big farmer. But I said, "Right
now, we've got um 80 to, you know,
100,000 NHS staff who are refusing to
have the COVID vaccine. This would be a
crisis. They're going to lose their
jobs. This is this mandate needs to be
overturned. It's not scientific. It's
not ethical." So, I got I got that into
the mainstream and ultimately we end up
overturning, right? The the the um the
mandate. Um but there was a backlash,
Steve, behind the scenes. And I've not
been public about this before, so I'm
going to tell you this for the first
time because I think it's time I I tell
this story. Shortly after me going on GB
News as a doctor who'd had the vaccine,
had been on Good Morning Britain to say
it was likely safe and effective to then
talking about we should maybe look into
this and maybe pause the situation
because of um these heart issues that
need to be investigated. I received an
email from the Royal College of
Physicians, this is the oldest medical
institution in the world, saying, "Dr.
Dr. Mahhatra um we have received a
number of anonymous complaints from
other fellows
that you uh in reference to my GB news
interview that you are spreading antiax
misinformation
and you've got four weeks to respond to
this and they were saying all the
different sanctions that could happen
because of me doing this right Steve at
that point I thought if we are going to
get a pause on this vaccine and really
investigate it it's because of such an
IND indoctrination because so many
people, billions of people around the
world have taken this and therefore the
the the battle to expose it is going to
be harder than anything I've ever done.
The only way in my only chance is to get
it published in a peer-reviewed journal
and then to get it into the news. I
spent 9 months at that stage literally
eating, breathing, sleeping, speaking to
two FISA whistleblowers, speaking to
eminent scientists in expertise I didn't
have around immunology and vaccine
development. Of course, I had the
understanding of cardiology, you know,
better than anybody in in this
particular field, in this particular
area. And when I did that research and
looked at it, I first of all concluded
that there absolutely needs to be a
suspension of the vaccine because um
what happened by the summer of 2022 and
this is actually the the most crucial
and important piece of data on its own
which should have been enough to suspend
it and actually suggest that it probably
shouldn't have been rolled out in the
first place is that those trials that
were done by Fiser and Madna which led
to the all the media reports 95 100%
effective um you know the approval by
the regulator the roll out the coercion
the mandates they were reanalyzed by
some very eminent scientists including
the associate editor the BMJ the one of
the world's top epidemiologists and they
published in the journal vaccine which
is the premier journal for vaccines and
they were able to get new data that was
made available on health Canada's
website and the FDA in America's website
and what they did in their reanalysis of
the original highquality clinical trials
is they found Steve you were more likely
to suffer serious harm from taking the
vaccine at a rate of 1 in 800 that meant
hospitalization disability or a
life-changing event than you were to be
hospitalized with COVID and this is
during the early phase right this is
during the most most lethal strain
for all age groups
yes well absolutely well they put all
age groups together so on average in all
age groups that's a very good question
um but what's missing is that actually
okay is there a benefit that's greater
than harm in certain age groups but we
can indirectly answer that in a second
so that was the original trial so on
average it was more harmful than
beneficial okay but even before talking
about all age groups Steve a 1 in 800
harm rate for a vaccine is completely
unacceptable in the sense that we have
pulled other vaccines in the past for
much less harm the swine flu vaccine was
suspended globally because it was found
to cause Gillian Barry syndrome a
debilitating neurological condition in
one in a 100,000 people. Rotovirus
vaccine was pulled in 1999 because it
was found to cause a form of bowel
obstruction in children at 1 in 10,000.
So you've already got a harm rate of
1800 irrespective of right. So that
first and foremost should be a red flag
to say hold on this is this is too much.
When they say harm rate how do they
what's the the range of definitions of
harm? Well, in this one they categorize
serious harm as it caused you to be
hospitalized.
Yeah.
It caused a disability.
Okay.
Or something that was life-changing.
Now, of course, that can incorporate
lots of different things, but of those,
and I spoke to the lead researcher I
know work with him on other things, um
40% of those serious harms were actually
related to clotting disorders like lung
clots, heart attacks, etc.
I want to make sure I'm super clear here
because I don't understand um the the
data you're citing. So you're saying
that they found that one in 800 people
would have serious harm or harm.
Uh serious harm.
Serious harm. Serious.
One in 800 people had
in the trials. One in 800. Yeah. One in
800. Serious harm. Right now just to
give you perspective so you can balance
it out just because this is important.
It's a question you've asked is really
important. um we didn't have any good
real world data at that point on
can we separate vaccinated from
unvaccinated to look at what the
hospitalization rate would be for COVID
for example in people who took the
vaccine versus the people that didn't
according to age group that data in the
whole world the only country to get make
that data available was the UK and they
did that in the beginning of uh 2023 so
January last year and What did that
show? After two doses of the FISA
vaccine, Steve, if you were over 70, so
this is the highest risk group, you had
to vaccinate 2,500 people to prevent one
person being hospitalized with COVID.
And this was with the different strain,
the omnicom strain, because the original
strain was
Yeah, it was they didn't Yeah, it was.
You're right. It was with the Omicron
strain. So that was still, but it gave
us a ballpark figure that even that. So
it's like it's like so say a patient
comes to me and says doc what are the
benefits of this drug as a prevention
whatever else and I say to them well if
you take this there's a one in 2,500
chance it will help you prevent you
being hospitalized I'll be honest with
you Steve I mean in medicine in all the
drugs I've used and all the data I know
about different medications and heart
disease etc that figure I mean it's a
very serious issue but that figure is a
joke I mean there's nothing of that of
such poor and then when you get under
the a when you get to people under the
age of say uh 50 you're talking about
having to vaccinate maybe several
hundred thousand to prevent one one
is that relevant for that the first
strain of co as well because or do we
not have the data on that because
we don't have that data on that we do in
my paper which I published actually we
did have some data on delta and if I
remember correctly the data on the over
70s the there's also problems with this
a little bit because it's not corrected
for other factors such as social
economics etc risk factors of you that
[snorts] might make people more
vulnerable So, if I remember correctly
from that paper, if you're over 70, that
was about 1 in 250. Delta was the worst
strain, actually. So, about 1 in 250.
Okay.
On the British Heart Foundation website,
I'm sure you've read this. Um,
just to read out what they say on there,
it says that up to one in 10,000 people
with the FISA vaccine might experience
are at risk of mo myocarditis or
pericarditis.
Have I pronounced that correctly? Yeah.
Up to one in 10,000 people for the Madna
vaccine. And uh it's not possible to
estimate other vaccines because they're
not frequently used in the UK. All three
of these COVID 19 vaccines are mRNA
vaccines designed to target the omnicon
omnicom strain. And at the top of this
it says the risk of myocarditis or
pericarditis after covid-19 vaccine is
very low. How do you respond to that? Do
you think you agree with that?
No, I don't agree with it at all. I
think there are a number of layers to
respond to this. I think the first thing
to say Steve is the British Art
Foundation with the greatest respect to
them and they do a lot of good work
overall is still part of the so-called
establishment which has been blinded for
years to actually even address so many
issues on health when it doesn't uh suit
the interests of big farmer and and and
I can say that categorically because I
know one of the the the chief advisor uh
uh to heart disease um for the British
Heart Foundation with the greatest
respect to him is a guy called professor
Rory Collins um University of Oxford and
they have said similar things when it
comes to statin drugs which we'll talk
about later um but that person the
people who advise them are people who
are heavily funded and linked to pharma
taking their institutions taking
hundreds of millions for example so
there's a huge bias there to start with
that's the first thing but it for me
what the British Heart Foundation are
not doing is actually countering and I
would love them to counter that cuz I'm
very open for the debate here is that
you've got a reanalysis of and they know
this the best way of determining serious
harm from any drug is actually looking
one of the best ways is the highest
quality level of evidence which is the
randomized control trials which is what
led to the approval when you've got an
independent reanalysis in a
peer-reviewed journal saying more harm
than good from the beginning that in
itself and and then we look at real
world data Steve there's so many other
bits of data that they are ignoring
basically to answer your question
they're ignoring ing lots of other data
which is very clear whether it's autopsy
data whether it's other studies that
came out of Israel that showed for
example this was published in a journal
called nature scientific reports and
again they ignore this they don't talk
about it so it's it's like hold on guys
this is you're ignoring you're not even
mentioning this data they showed and
this is really most disturbing in 2021
there was a 25% increase in heart
attacks and or cardiac arrests in people
aged between 16 and 39 which was
associated with the COVID vaccine but
not associated with COVID.
How do they how do they tease out I was
thinking about um you know the increase
in heart related conditions around the
pandemic and following the pandemic and
in in much of your work and I think in
this book I can't actually pronounce the
word pop diet. Pop diet,
the Popey diet. You talk about how these
other sort of lifestyle factors like
community, friendships, relationships,
stress, mental health, being sedentary,
sedentary, all of these things can
contribute to heart problems. So when I
think about the pandemic, I go, people
weren't seeing their friends. We were
stressed more than ever. People were
losing their jobs. They were furoughed.
Um they had mental health, you know, we
saw the mental health uh stats explode.
Yeah.
Um
all the factors there that are linked to
heart disease. So, how do we know that
it it wasn't th those factors of the
pandemic that caused an increase in
heart related issues and how do how can
we tease that out from the the vaccine?
Really good question. Um because
remember I also said that early on
before I realized the vaccine might be
playing a role. I actually thought that
was that was the most likely explanation
of the increased heart attacks, lockdown
stress, poor diet, etc.
You'd expect to see an increase in
you would you would and I think it has
played a role, Steve, for sure it has
played a role. But then when you look at
the quality of data to say how much of a
role that's played that it it's on a
different level when you look at the
vaccine when you look at the plausible
mechanism you look at the types of
people that are dying young people and
stuff like that it doesn't fit. Um I'll
be honest my personal view it is a
primary driver without any shadow of a
doubt in my mind and a personal view of
the excess deaths. As a scientist, I'll
say it's a likely significant
contributing factor, but probably the
most likely because another aspect to
all of this is what we call
pharmarmaccovigilance reports. So these
are reports that are done by members of
the public when they they have an
adverse reaction to any drug and it's
not easy to fill in. You fill in these
what we call yellow card scheme. You can
get it online and you send it off to
your doctor or to you know the
regulator. those reports and I've
throughout my career I've never seen the
extent like for example I'll give you an
example um after 9.7 million doses of
the Astrogenica vaccine which was
ultimately pulled right astrogenica of
course was also one of the co vaccines
there were 800,000 in this country
800,000 yellow card reports now some of
them um are not going to be serious
serious but people don't fill in a
yellow card report if you've had a bit
of a fever after having a vaccine
they've felt quite ill ill enough to
that's already and then within at it's
estimated maybe one in five of those
from other data would suggest serious
harm. So other data from reporting and
with the so with about I think 30
million doses if it was probably about
30 million doses of FISA we had about
500,000 yellow card reports in this
country right which is still a lot you
know that's one in 60 yellow card
reports now they're all not going to be
super serious hospitalization death
whatever else um but when you put all of
the data together Steve that it paints a
picture that makes it look as clear as a
day that anybody doubting you know it
should the the evidence should be this
is the primary cause of the excess
deaths until proven otherwise. That's
the level of evidence, Steve, but it's
just being ignored. It's being ignored
and I can talk about why it's being
ignored.
One of the things I've been sort of gaps
in my head that I've been keen to fill
is do you believe that if we hadn't have
introduced the vaccine, more or less
people would have survived CO? Because
I've got close friends of mine that got
COVID and I watched them go from very
healthy looking people to basically
skeletons. Good friend actually good
friend one of the CEOs of my company his
dad went from being a very healthy man
to being basically looking like a
skeleton and almost died. And then I've
got I know of other people that did die.
So I think in the grand scheme of things
when we think about um vaccines was it a
net positive that we had a vaccine?
There is from everything I know now I've
slowly and reluctantly come to the
conclusion that the COVID vaccine
introduction has had a catastrophic
overall net negative effect on the
population and society. And one of the
re and and let me just caveat this
because you've mentioned the fact that
people suffered from COVID and I'm not
denying that. I've got patients, Steve,
that I see that have had long CO that
weren't vaccinated, okay? And have
suffered quite badly.
Most of the most serious aspects of
COVID happened early on in 2020 and
predominantly affected the elderly.
We've got all of that data now that's
been reanalyzed by one of the world's
top scientists. And even looking back
now, essentially if you were under 70,
even from the beginning, your risk of
serious harm from COVID is in the
ballpark figure of the flu, right? And
even I actually was wrong. I wrote an
article in European scientist in Mar in
April 2020 because I actually initially
started making a lot of noise about why
we not talking about lifestyle with
COVID to help people mitigate, you know,
the immune improve their immune system.
And I said, you know, talking to um a
friend of mine who works in the busiest
DR in America in in New York who I've
done work with and he said, it seemed
this is I've never seen anything like
this is devastating. Some of my
colleagues are dying. So I have no doubt
that at the very beginning in the early
strain of the virus, it was really bad
especially for vulnerable people, people
with obesity, etc.
Cuz you know I I I remember getting CO I
was actually used to live on the top
floor of this building and I remember
I've never experienced anything quite as
bizarre as the symptom set that I had
when I got CO. The fact that at 3:00
a.m. in the morning, I don't take
medicine. So, fact [snorts] at 3:00 a.m.
in the morning, I'm lying flat on my
floor ordering ibuprofen on Uber Eats
because my back I just had the most
bizarre like back pain. And so, I was
having to like lie flat on the floor cuz
I couldn't even lie in bed. It was so
bad.
Just this weird set of symptoms that I'd
never had before. My my partner, she
lost her smell and taste. And
it was so unusual. It was so unusual. Um
there's not been a time in my lifetime
that people have lost their smell and
taste on mass. So when I when it when
you hear it compared to the flu, you go,
"This was not the flu. This is something
different."
Yes. No, the symptoms are very
different. And I think now it's accepted
um that um and we won't go into a lot of
detail, but I think one of the reasons
as well, it was human engineered. You
know, almost certainly the evidence
points to it being a lab leak, right? So
it had a very You're right. It was very
different to any other virus
that used to be a conspiracy theory.
I know, right?
Now it's not a conspiracy theory.
[laughter]
I know. I know. Exactly.
It's funny. Yeah. when you heard about
that that that lab in Wuhan that were
messing around with viruses [laughter]
and then we we decided to put the blame
on like a market store but I think now
the general consensus is that it
probably came from that lab in Wuhan.
Yeah. Absolutely. Yeah. Absolutely. And
I've spoken to in fact I I spent time
with actually the scientists that first
went public with it who identified it um
guy in America sorry in Australia. Um so
yeah that came from lab but so I think
it had these different strange things
loss of smell etc. But in terms of
serious illness, um it was there at the
beginning. Now when you when you look
back, I think essentially there were
vulnerable elderly but uh you know who
who suffered um especially people in
nursing homes with a lot of deaths
there. But there's so many other
components to this. So one is did we
institute the correct treatments? A lot
of people were killed because they
weren't managed properly in ITU, you
know, in terms of putting people
incubating them, putting on respirators
when they didn't need it. And that in
itself has a risk. um some of the wrong
treatments were given. There were other
treatments now that we look back that
probably would have been helpful things
like ivormectin which I know has been a
bit controversial but um was very it's a
very safer than paracetamol right so
first do no harm okay um but it may have
done some good and a lot of people and
doctors around the world that used it in
several thousand there's a doctor in
South Africa that used it in 14,000
patients including many elderly not a
single one died from co and this is
early on so all these things that we
missed we miss a lifestyle intervention
so all those things are there but by the
time you get to the end of 2020 the
beginning of 2021 on there are so many
things that happened Steve that you have
to think about before you introduce a
vaccine. One is what is the state of the
virus right now um and it had already
mutated to some degree and become less
lethal. There is natural immunity which
we know is very powerful right um and
but the issue with the vaccine is and
certainly it was probably there from the
beginning. We know that when one looks
at the original trials there was a and
this is what the drug companies have
doing for a long long period of time.
They will mislead people using
statistics about the benefits. So use
something called relative risk
reduction. Let me just explain this
because you can apply this to statins as
well. Is they presented the benefit as a
95% protection against infection.
Remember that figure 95% right? And it
was what we call relative risk
reduction. So
if you've got for example two groups in
a trial, say 100 in one trial in in in
in one group and 100 in another and
let's just say let's give you an example
of statins and you're you're following
them up over 5 years to look at a drug
to see if it benefits them in preventing
having a heart attack.
In one group they get the dummy pill
um and you follow them up over five
years. And in the people that got the
dummy pill, in fact you didn't do
anything different, two of them suffered
a heart attack.
In the other group, the other hundred
people that were followed up over five
years who got the pill, the the drug,
right, only one suffered a heart attack.
So you've reduced the heart attack risk
by 50%. Right? Two to one, right? 50%.
But you've only prevented one heart
attack. You've treated 100 people, but
you've prevented one heart attack out of
treating 100. Yeah. Does that make
sense? So that's a 1% absolute benefit.
In other words, when you explain that to
a patient, when I ask when I have engage
in sort of what we call informed
consent, shared decision-making, when
they ask me about drug, I'll say, "This
gives you a 1% chance if you take this
drug religiously of preventing a heart
attack." Now, you you apply that to the
original COVID vaccine trials, which by
the way have so many other problems with
them because even those trials were
conducted and analyzed and designed by
the drug industry. I mean this is one of
the biggest myths that needs to be
busted Steve out there for most doctors
um as well as members of the public
medical knowledge is under commercial
control but most people don't know that.
So what happens is they did the trial
but let's just talk about what the
results their their results showed us a
95% relative risk reduction against
infection. They didn't show any
reduction in uh co death by the way in
that trial right they just said prevent
from infection but we then presume it
may then prevent right uh reduce death
rates absolute risk reduction from
infection at the beginning was one was
0.84%.
One in 119
so that's how many people you need to
vaccinate to prevent one infection which
actually people were not told that. So
imagine you're thinking, should I take
this vaccine? Say, well Steve, there's a
one less than 1% chance that it's going
to prevent you getting infected. People
weren't told that.
But but that it then reduce my chance of
getting seriously ill. Right.
No, but we've then talked about that,
haven't we? Like as in when you look at
the data certainly beginning of 2023
that was looking over the previous year,
2022, you have to vaccinate 2,500 people
to prevent one person getting seriously
ill with COVID, right? If you're over 70
with the second with the other strain,
but
with the other strain and it may have
been better, Steve, you're right. It may
it probably was better but it still
numbers are still much smaller than what
people were led to believe. And and by
the way Steve the narrative at the
beginning they kept changing the
goalpost. Remember it wasn't about
preventing serious illness and death. It
was all about preventing infection. You
are not in America you've seen it all
over CNN Rachel Madau and she's saying
it so passionately. If you take this
vaccine you are not going to get COVID
and calling anyone who who questions it
being a science deny. I mean Jesus
Christ. So my last question on that
before I I say I was going to say is um
do you think there would have been less
deaths overall
if we hadn't have had a vaccine?
Yes.
You think there would have been less
deaths
by now when you look at it. So I think
over time so so where we are now
start
um
so if we hadn't have introduced the
vaccine for that first strain of co you
think there'd be less deaths.
Okay. If I was to I still think that
if okay this is very nuanced but
important.
If the vaccine had only been offered to
the high-risisk people at the beginning,
say the over 70s or people with multiple
risk factors, [snorts]
I think there is a case to be made,
right? I'm going to counter that in a
minute though. But there is a case to be
made that there was overall benefit
versus harm. But there's a problem. One,
there wasn't true informed consent,
right? Because those figures, those
numbers weren't given to pay people
about the prevention of infection, etc.,
Right. Um and two, if you have an
average serious harm rate of 1 in 800,
any scientist, even regulators would
have said, "Hold on a minute. This is
way too high. This is too risky." And
this is, by the way, Steve, only the
short-term. Because remember, this
vaccine didn't go through what other
vaccines have gone through, which is 5
to 10 years of safety testing.
[snorts]
So if you throw all those caveats in and
use informed consent, I can guarantee
you with all of my knowledge, expertise,
experience with patients when you engage
in these conversations, most of those
elderly people will probably still
refused it. But but but yes, I think
there is a case to be made that the the
benefits may have outweighed the harms
in those high-risisk people at the very
beginning in the short term. Absolutely.
You know, when I think about Rachel
Maddau and what she said on TV about,
you know, that it's going to stop the
spread of infection, etc., I can have a
degree of empathy
because if that's the information you're
being fed and you are a public-f facing
broadcaster
and it's being fed to you by scientists
and it's been fed to you by the NHS and
whoever else and you know, very credible
people that you've been raised to
believe and to trust. If you're a public
facing broadcaster, what else are you
going to say? You're not going to say
the opposite. You're not you can't sit
on the fence. Your job is to broadcast.
It's the news, right? So I I have and I
think you did the same. You said earlier
you went on Good Morning Britain or
something and
and I'm not blaming Rachel Mad here. I'm
just saying that the indoctrination that
came through the mainstream media was so
strong through people like Rachel Maddo.
And why is that important, Steve? I had
a conversation with the chairman of the
British Medical Association in December
2021 when I was campaigning to overturn
vaccine mandates for healthcare workers.
He had access to Saji Javid. I had a
previous uh rapport with Matt Hanok but
he had obviously left by then. Um and I
spoke to his name Shan Nagpaul and I
explained him everything I knew about
the vaccine after looking at data at
that point. I hadn't published at this
point but I went through it in in in in
a logical way. chairman of the BMA, by
the way, not just some random person.
And he said, "Asim,
no one appears to have critically
appraised the evidence on the vaccine as
well as you have from our two-hour chat.
Most of my colleagues
who are in senior policy, you know,
medical positions, establishment
positions are getting their information
on the benefits and harms of the vaccine
from the BBC."
It's it's super difficult.
Isn't that extraordinary, though? I
think it's really difficult because if I
if you're dealing with lots of people
dying on mass and it's happened very
very quickly and people are just
dropping dead and you're seeing you know
hospitals being overrun,
you've got to
you got to tread carefully with the
information you're putting out there.
So, if the scientific information comes
in early and maybe a little bit too too
soon before it's really been vetted and
triple checked, saying one thing
and you're desperate for answers, I can
I can see why a group of people would
say, "Okay, this is the best
information." And then to go against
that information could potentially cause
tons of harm. So, I can also imagine why
a group of people would be really slow
to then change their mind away from that
because you're dealing with like
Steve, I was that person, too. So, I'm
with you on that 100%. I think where I'm
taking this is the system if it had been
more transparent early on and this is
where I've been, you know, banging my,
you know, head against a brick wall to
some degree for about a decade. If there
was more transparency in the system, we
would have had better information even
from the beginning. But that information
was kept commercially confidential
because of the system that really is
geared towards uh supporting the
interests of big farmer not in the
interest of people's health and that and
and if that and that's the key point
here right this is we're looking back
over time think how did this happen how
do we allow this to happen we need to go
deeper say how do we stop this happening
again in the future so we have better
information that's all I'm saying
do you think it is malicious at like a
government level do you think
no
you don't think it is
not at all I um know many politicians uh
very senior people um cross party uh
some of them I call my friends uh many
of them come to me for medical advice
right um in fact one of them uh you know
he lost 100 pounds on my POPY diet with
Tom Watson the deputy leader of the
Labour party right
so um and and and these genuinely by and
large are decent people that want to do
the right thing but they are also fed
you know misinformation by lobbyists
they take as expert opinion or
information stuff that has been created
for the purposes of the interest of big
food or big farmer. you know, when I um
campaigned on you getting the sugar tax
introduced, you know, I wrote articles
in the BMJ and I started ranging every
newspaper and I remember I thought we're
going to win this because the front page
of the Daily Mail was sugar is a new
tobacco and that put pressure on the
then secretary Jeremy Hunt because the
male then decided they were going to go
right and of course you know that
government conservative government are
particularly you know influenced by what
the Daily Mail writes because they
traditionally one of their supporters
but there was a story around that time
where they exposed and it was on the
front page that government ministers in
terms of obesity strategy, how do we
solve the obesity epidemic had had 99
meetings with representatives of the
food industry and not a single meeting
with a public health doctor for example.
So I know how that hap that obviously
that the system should be more
transparent to make sure that they
understand that those those politicians
but many of them um were shocked you
know when I when I told them this
information they trust me um one of them
you know was a very a former government
minister who who said it seem you know
this is she's shocked by it but like now
understands it they they were captured
as well but we were all we were in a
state of fear Steve as well we let's not
underestimate that at the very beginning
we were all scared we didn't know what
we were dealing with and of course we
have to have empathy for ourselves when
you're in a state of fear right for all
be you know I think it was a big error
to some degree and everybody was scared
and I don't think it was malicious to
create that fear initially
um it stops us you know being being able
psychologically it inhibits your ability
to engage in critical thinking and all
of us were in that position is there a
risk now that if there was a deadly vac
deadly virus that broke out across the
world people are so scared of vaccines
now that they would not go and get it
because there something I was saying to
my friend the other day I was like we've
gotten to a point now where I think so
many people are skeptical about vaccines
that if if something does come from
another lab somewhere and it is really
fatal and the government stand on that
podium again and say hands face or
whatever it was that slogan and they say
um we need you to all go get this
vaccine
who's going to go get it
yeah no I I agree I don't like that
situation I don't want us to be in this
situ situation. But you're right, there
is
and there will be another pandemic.
There there is a big risk and um the way
around that is and this is what we're
taught as doctors,
right? It's one of the things that is
ingrained into us as a medical school um
is that when you make a mistake, you
tell the patient.
Patients are very forgiving if they
think and know that you acted from a
place of good intent cuz mistakes
happen, things go wrong. this is what we
need as a MIA culpa right I was willing
to do that I mean in some way I was
partly responsible certainly at the very
early stage to support a vaccine roll
out but I know that the most important
thing for me to do when new information
comes available and medicine again is
not an exact science it evolves
but let's play that out let's play that
out so if we do if we had a situation
where the I don't know the scientist
that said really positive things about
the vaccine that it was side effect free
or whatever They come out now and they
say, "We were totally wrong." And they
say, "We got it." So, so let's let's
play out that scenario. What would
happen the next day on social media is
everybody who was criticized or
critiqued or lost their job or was, I
don't know, in some way penalized for
their views that there might be side
effects that we're not talking about,
would immediately go to their their base
of their audience and say, "I told you
so." the conspiracy theorists on the
internet who are really extreme that
believe that there's a group of people
wearing like tin hats that have come up
with this idea, they would be empowered
and what you'd then have is a situation
where another vac another pandemic rolls
in from a far away land. those people
said, "Listen, you know, those people
that you see what I'm to say it it would
in my mind it would fuel the um the
narrative that vaccines are bad and less
like people would be less likely to take
them because we're not driven by facts,
stats, graphs, and figures. We're driven
by emotion."
Y
it's much more powerful
than just if a scientist standing there
and showing me a graph. It's how I feel
which matters the most. And if I felt
like I was betrayed and lied to, there's
no chance that I'd run down and get
another jab or something in my arm.
It's an uncomfortable truth that needs
facing though, Steve, because if we
don't face it, these problems are going
to carry on. We're not going to improve
the situation by ignoring it and
sweeping under the carpet. So, there
will be that, you're right, there will
be that backlash. I myself have had
that, right? I've had people, you know,
I I got heckled, you know, um a talk I
gave on this for the first time when I
spoke at it in London, um saying, "I was
part of it all. You're a liar." All this
stuff. Yeah, absolutely. I I got, you
know, exploiters were thrown at me. And
I I understand where that emotion comes
from. But at the end of the day, the
only way we can progress and evolve is
it just accepting. But that, you know,
because we want to then it's not just
about saying we got this wrong. It's
actually explaining to people and
saying, "Okay, we thought we were doing
the right thing. These are problems in
the system we weren't aware of. Most
people are not aware of this. We need to
resolve this and move forward with
greater transparency. And over time now,
okay, within the immediate aftermath, of
course, there's going to be that
emotional reaction. There's going to be
a backlash if there happen to be a
pandemic within a short space of time
after that admission. Yes, it may well
be that people aren't going to go and
take vaccines. But why should they,
Steve?
Vaccines are can save your life.
No, no, no. I'm talking about a new
anything new. I'm not talking about So,
yes, absolutely. Traditional vaccines. I
mean, I'm still a big subscriber and
supporter, let me just make this clear,
of traditional vaccines. In my paper
that I wrote, I said, you know,
estimates suggest vaccines have saved 4
to 5 million lives a year. And the
serious harm rate of vaccines, I think
there's, of course, there's going to be
nothing's completely safe. No drug is
pharmacist completely safe. But just in
terms of published data, right, probably
still an exaggeration, but still it
gives you it gives you a comparison.
Serious harm rate for traditional
vaccines, 1 to two per million.
All right. [snorts]
People aren't very people aren't very
smart, though. including me when it
comes to when I hear the word vaccine I
think all vaccines you think we don't
know what a vaccine is so it's just a
word it's like if you said to me dogs
are savaging one in 800 people you know
the average person isn't might not
[laughter] the average person might not
think if that's a chihuahua or like a
German shepherd we just heard dogs and
then there's going to be a fear of dogs
and I think the same with the vaccines
we don't know the difference between
different vaccines we just think they're
all the same so if you tell me that
vaccines are causing x y and zed I'm
going to go I don't Yeah. If someone
offers me a flu shot or whatever thing
or whatever, it's the trust that's been
eroded in the system and it's my trust
in the word vaccine that's been eroded.
Yeah. No. And it's it's unfortunate.
It's unfortunate that that that has
definitely showed. There has been a dent
and a change I think an uptake of things
like MMR
because of this.
It saved my life when I was a kid. I got
my all my family got malaria. We were in
Africa so
they all got pretty bad malaria and uh
so we yeah my pretty pretty serious as
well. I think I almost died of uh
malaria I hear from my mother.
Steve the thing is with doial vaccines
they went through many many years of
safety checks right and this is an
important thing people I think we
shouldn't underestimate people's
intelligence and their ability to
understand and forgive as long as we
communicate it in the right way. I have
these conversations all the time with my
patients. You know I give them numbers.
I talk through it. When I talk about
statin drugs for example I say I'm going
to give you these numbers but there are
lots of caveats here. one the data has
never been independently verified right
and I give them all this and I give them
alternatives etc I do this all the time
and patients want that they want more
information in a way that they can
understand and of course yes they want
to trust their doctor but again it's all
it comes down to ethics values intent
and doctors not admitting their mistakes
is a very very bad place to be
the chair of the clinical cardiology at
the University of Edinburgh professor
Mark Dwek commented that um on your
opinion saying the co vaccines the co
vaccine opinions you are misguided and
in fact dangerous. The vast majority of
cardiologists do not agree with your
views and they are not based on robust
science. Now, if you're someone
listening to this now, I've got your
opinion and I've got this guy's opinion,
the chair of the clinical cardiology at
the University of Edinburgh. I've got
the NHS saying that vaccines are safe
and extensively reviewed in both adults
and children and that the independent
medicines and health care products
regulatory agency is continually
monitoring the safety of COVID vaccines
and reports of side effects are very
rare. And then I've got your view. How
do I as someone that's hearing this in
this year and this in this year figure
out what to believe
because everyone's so compelling.
Everyone's got data.
Well, you just ultimately got to go with
your own intuition. Steve, who
my intuition is always going to side
with fear
because I'm a human being.
May maybe and and this stuff works. Um
I'll come on to this and this was a bit
of a hatchet job by the Guardian.
Interestingly, I've written 19 opeds for
the Guardian Observer newspaper over the
years, but you know how these how this
journalism works. They'll they'll move
on. Um a couple of things just couple of
facts to throw back at you first and
then what you've raised is really
interesting historically and something
that I've learned from this sort of
backlash. um Mark Dwek with the greatest
respect to him uh what wasn't disclosed
in the article is that he has taken
money from FISA he's he's he's you know
been funded by FISA and that's factual
you can look that up right that's one
thing so that's a bias um the more
important than that the MH which was
described as independent right yes is
not the British medical journal BMJ did
an investigation
published um in the summer of 2022 and I
presented this data uh on the on the on
the MH at the British Medical
Association annual conference where the
president of the BMA was there, the
chair of the BMA was there, right? And
they were gobsmacked and they didn't
they couldn't believe and this is why
this information is so important, these
facts so important. The MA even I was
shocked when I read this our medical
regulator in this country MH gets 86% of
its funding from big farmer which is a
huge bias. So they're not independent.
So those are those are the two facts
that should at least if I threw that
back you say hold on a minute then
should I believe all this now what was
the purpose of that article of course it
was to undermine my credibility I'm
exposing essentially something you know
it for all intents and purposes pretty
horrific you know reluctantly on the BBC
with 25 million views or whatever else
right um but people that inspire me have
been through far worse right and and I'm
an activist that want to expose
injustices right the likes of Mandela
Gandhi Martin Luther
One of the lessons from them and even in
public health advocacy as soon as your
work threatens an industry or an
ideological cabal you will be attacked
sometimes unrelentingly and viciously
and that was really a hatchet job.
Can I what about the the second part of
the quote that where he says that the
vast majority of cardiologists do not
agree with your views?
Um
is that true in your opinion? He's
giving his opinion, but actually um from
every okay every cardiologist I spoke to
has basically said you're going to do
doing great work but they won't speak
out and this is part of the problem
right is that people are turning a blind
eye. I had uh one cardiologist um who
met me in the street right these are I
have this happens all the time and he
said I read your paper he said I can
tell you now although they won't admit
it publicly all the cardiologists in our
department and they know you and they
and they they trust where you come from
and your integrity none of them are
having any more COVID vaccines because
of you they're on to it but Steve this
is a problem only a small minority of
people are willing to speak out I have a
platform where I'm able to articulate it
and and do so. But that is my duty and
responsibility. This is just a
reflection of uh what is ultimately a
big farmer tyranny. You know, I know
you've interviewed Jordan Peterson, who
I um admire greatly. Uh and and Jordan
Peterson says when you have something to
say, silence is a lie. [snorts] And you
know, tyranny tyranny emerges when
people are afraid to say what they
think. And when everybody essentially
lies all the time by being silent,
that's when the tyranny is complete.
This is exactly where we are. But I do
want to mention something if you don't
if you don't mind like I have to go
through this right myself and it's not
easy right you get all this stuff and
people checking credibility and I
remember when that that that Guardian
hit piece which was like the you know
the top story that day I actually felt
in many way feelings but I felt ah over
the target here right because Gandhi
said first they ignore you then they
laugh at you then they fight you then
you win. So the point is these things
work Steve but you know the truth is the
truth. So
what is the reality then of your of your
life going through that? Because you
know if you get attacked from all
angles, you've not got immediate family
there, you're you're reading stuff about
yourself online all the time, your
colleagues, etc. are turning on you.
What what's life like in if I'm a fly on
the wall in those hard moments? Um
very deep pain
on
to to to have the knowledge and deep an
understanding that in my view we are
dealing with one of the greatest likely
corporate crimes, medical mistakes,
damage to people's health. People are
suffering, people are dying, people have
got all sorts of problems because of
this vaccine. to have that deep
knowledge and understanding and to not
be able to see any great progress or
enough progress for this to be resolved
or to be improved. That suffering around
me gives me very deep pain more than
anything else.
Why?
I think inherently I'm just very
sensitive to that around me. That's just
the way I am. I think it's part of my
innate nature. I've always been like
that. You know, I had a I went for um
you know, on the positive side, there
are a lot of good friends around. You
know, I haven't got immediate emotional
support, if that makes sense, right
where I am, but there are hundreds of
thousands of people that support me
certainly who follow me on Twitter and I
people come and meet me in the street. I
randomly bumped into this doctor in the
street who I didn't know, an older
doctor quite well known. I won't name
him. Um and he said he he got really
emotional in the street and he met me
and he said, "Dr. Satra, thank you for
everything you are doing with all of
this. And I said, well, you know, I I
tried to be as humble with it. I said,
I'm just a medium for a message. I'm
doing the right thing. He said, no, what
you're doing is extremely brave and I'm
with you 100% and I know the vaccine
killed one of my colleagues, etc., etc.
And he was very honest. He said, I'm
just too frightened to speak up,
[snorts]
but that gives me fuel, right? And this
this happens constantly. So, I think
there is definitely something that I get
from that. So let me summarize your
position then because I want to move on
to I want to talk about statins and
heart disease and particularly high
cholesterol because I got told by my
doctor I have high high cholesterol. To
summarize your position is you believe
that vaccines themselves are
net good for the world.
Some of the greatest achievements in
medicine are traditional vaccines. No
doubt. You believe that the COVID
vaccine at the start when administered
to certain age groups that were most
vulnerable
there's an argument to say that it was
it was a net positive.
Yeah, I think there's an argument
and that you believe after sort of 2022
or 2021 when the variant changed to
another I think it was called omnicron
wasn't it? Um that at that point it
certainly became a net negative. Is that
your view? I would think probably
earlier Steph and the only reason I say
this is anecdotal evidence of course is
my dad had a cardiac arrest in the
summer of 2021 he was 73 right and he
could be considered in a high-risisk
group so I think that if one was to make
that case I would say well well it
depends what we're talking about as well
in terms of COVID yes right the net
benefit in terms of COVID and COVID
deaths but the problem is what's the
point in preventing someone getting
COVID if six months later they're going
to die of a cardiac arrest
you see what I mean So we've got to look
at it in that nuanced way. But yeah, I
think there is a case to be made that if
it was just given to certain high-risisk
groups overall there may have been a net
benefit at the beginning. But where we
are now and where it's continued and the
mandates and all the stuff that extended
it to many more people taking it and
that almost certainly was being fueled
by FISA and that's been shown that they
were you know giving money to grass
credible grassroots organizations in the
US to promote the mandates. Right? this
is after the data they received showing
that it wasn't preventing infection and
causing serious harm. Right? So this is
this is a problem with the system. I'm
not blaming individuals here. This is
something we'll talk about with statins
as well is that um the uh the system the
corporate capitalist system or the way
capitalism is is actually being
implemented is in its in many ways and
this has been diagnosed by a forensic
psychologist. uh the the corporation as
an institution is psychopathic when it
comes to making money. That means they
have callous unconcern for the safety of
others, repeated lying, conning others
for profit. And this is unfortunately
this is the root of the problem.
And you also believe that there is a
chance as well and it's likely that the
impacts of the lifestyle changes, the
lockdowns etc. The stress, the mental
health issues, the removing people from
being able to see their loved ones, the
sedentary lifestyles also contributed to
the rise in heart related conditions and
heart disease.
100%. It's played a role. A smaller
role, but it's played a role 100%.
So, I want to talk about heart disease
because I don't even know what heart
disease is. And also, I don't know what
a heart attack is. I think we kind of
all just assume we know, but what what
is a what is a heart what's heart
disease and what's a heart attack? So
heart disease uh the
conventional
description or explanation of heart
disease is disease that affects the
blood vessels of the heart essentially.
Okay, that's that's coronary artery
disease we call it.
That's what most people when they talk
about heart disease that's what they
that's what they mean. Um so that
disease that affects the blood vessels
leads to buildup of something called
plaque uh which is furring if you like.
Okay. Like a
plaque.
Plaque. Yeah. So plaque is furring of
the arteries like a blockage.
Okay.
Right. A blockage.
That blockage is made up of uh cells of
the immune system. It's made up of
cholesterol. Right. And over time that
those blockages can either suddenly uh
like a pimple building up and the pimple
getting bigger and bigger and bigger or
even a small pimple suddenly bursting
and the contents of that plaque, right?
The response to um
the blood having contact with the
contents of that plaque that has built
up over time suddenly causes a clot to
form. And if the clot blocks the whole
artery then during the blood supply is
completely cut off to the heart muscle.
So the the purpose of those blood
vessels is to supply the heart muscle
with blood so it can contract. So if you
have a blockage that is there for
several minutes completely cutting off
the blood supply depending on where it
is, it will cause that area of the heart
muscle to lose its oxygen supply and
nutrients and die and scar and that
leads to cell death. But of course the
heart muscle is quite big. So it could
be a very small heart attack, could be a
big heart attack. And then so so heart
attack specifically is death of any
region of the heart muscle because of a
blockage.
Okay, I'm going to try
the death of the cells.
I'm going to try and play this back to
you. Yeah,
correct me if I'm wrong. So, you get
this buildup in your artery.
Yeah.
But due to a bunch of factors I was
talking about,
the buildup explodes.
Yes.
Flows through the blood blocking the
artery at some point.
Yes.
And then that blockage in the artery
causes a cell in the heart, some areas
in the heart to die because they're not
getting oxygen.
Exactly. So, so you you're cut you've
basically cut off the blood supply. So
it's cutting off the blood supply to
whatever area because there are many
branches. It depends where the blockage
is. You cut off the blood supply. If
it's cut off for long enough,
those cells, every cell in our body
needs oxygen to survive, right? Then
that those that part of the heart muscle
will die and become scarred.
So it dies and becomes scarred in about
seven 7 8 minutes. You said
it can well it can take you know 15 to
20 minutes. It depends on different
factors but within minutes. Yes.
And how does that feel from minute one
till minute sort of 10?
So the classic symptoms of a heart
attack, right? that is a central what we
call crushing heaviness or pain that can
travel radiate we say in medical terms
to the neck the jaw it can go into the
shoulders um it can go into the back
that's the classic symptoms or down the
left arm
and you're conscious at this point
yes you're conscious so a cardiac arrest
just means the heart stopping ultimately
actually we all have a cardiac arrest
when we die the last thing to go is our
heart right but um one of the most
common causes of a cardiac arrest
certainly prematurely, not because of
old age, for example, is um and this is
random. So you can have a heart attack
and you can be conscious and have pain
and you get to hospital and you get
diagnosed and you might have a you know
a stent put in or you might be put on
blood thinners or whatever. Um in a
certain proportion of people um and it
doesn't depend on the size of the heart
attack. So um you can have a big area of
the heart muscle that's damaged or a
small area of the heart muscle that
damaged and it's random that it can
cause an interruption in the normal
electrical activity of the heart. The
heart has electrical circuit that allows
it to pump. Right? There's an electrical
circuit that allows it to pump in a
certain you know in a in a in a regular
rhythm. that circuit can get interrupted
and then the heart muscle that's pumping
like this right because it's pumping all
the blood around your body to your brain
everything else suddenly starts
quivering right uh and that's known as
ventricular fibrillation
that's when you see on all the you know
on movies or on TV shows and stuff like
that when they start shocking people and
that shows on the heart tracing as a
kind of squiggle like this
okay
right and that is what we call a
shockable rhythm if you deliver a shock
you know often 200 jewels right is is
delivered with a defibrillator that will
often restart the heart into a normal
rhythm and then the patient can be
managed and treated for example. So
that's but that quivering of the heart
causes basically the heart to stop
pumping blood around the body. The
heart's still moving but it's not enough
to pump blood around the body and if
that's going for a very long time Steve
not lot long you know for example in my
dad's case it may have been similar 20
or 30 minutes then eventually then you
know that will even stop and patient
dies. So, I've read some stats from a
different source that said in the UK,
one in eight men and one in 14 women die
from conory heart disease over the
course of their lifetime and that nearly
50% of all US adults have some type of
heart disease. Um, and before the
pandemic hit in 2019, 12 children died
every single week in the UK from cardiac
arrest. So, I mean, this is if
anything's going to kill me, it's
probably this.
Yes, most likely.
So, how do I stop it? [laughter] Right.
Um, how do you stop it? How do you even
reverse it?
How about some statins?
Yeah. So, okay,
let me just say this. My doctor, I got
my lab results back like 3 days ago,
and he told me a couple of things. One
thing he told me is, "You got load
vitamin D." I said, "Fine, yeah, get it.
I'm in a room all day." Uh, the second
thing he said is, "Your cholesterol is
high." He said, "Your bad cholesterol is
high." And I I don't really know what to
make of that, but he said, "Your your
bad cholesterol is high, and I need to
get that down."
Um, my father takes statins, which I
know a lot of people take statins. I
think it's like 200 million people are
taking statins globally. Um, so because
I have you here, what do you think of of
what the advice I was given, which is
just to get my bad cholesterol down and
how do I prevent myself ending up on
either statins or having a heart attack?
Okay. So on the statins issue and the
cholesterol issue traditionally Steve
for uh decades and even now the one of
the the primary focus within medicine
within cardiology to combat heart
disease was to get your so-called bad
cholesterol LDL as low as possible.
So LDL means bad cholesterol.
It's called low density lipoprotein
which is the bad stuff.
It's so well it's thought of
conventionally as a bad cholesterol.
Right. And the reason for that is is
that earlier studies that were done on
uh the correlation that was found
between high cholesterol and heart
disease [snorts]
um revealed that very high levels of
total cholesterol. There was a very high
um prevalence of heart disease. But
those levels of of cholesterol go and we
go we're talking about going back from
you know studies that started in 1948
that went over three decades where they
they found cholesterol being associated
with heart disease was only really there
at very very high levels. That's the
first thing.
The second part of it and why they
thought that getting it as low as
possible was the solution is that people
who had very low levels of cholesterol
tended not get heart disease. Right?
Total cholesterol less than four, LDL
less than two mill moles. Let's just say
that for argument sake, less than 2 mill
moles per liter. And by the way, just so
just so people understand this, you
would have got a red mark probably
saying that your LDL cholesterol is high
if it's more now the the guideline
suggests if it's more than three mill
moles per liter in your blood. The
measurement that is considered high, but
we we we'll we'll tear that we'll tease
that apart in a second. Now the thinking
was that okay if people with low
cholesterol are not getting heart
disease and people with very high levels
of cholesterol are getting heart disease
and that was total cholesterol above 10
for example right and LDL's above seven
or eight massively high right then or or
or more likely to get heart disease at
significant
numbers uh the thinking was that the
lower the better so all these drug
trials started but there's one thing
missing first and foremost most is that
most people's cholesterol Steve LDL is
genetic.
80% of your cholesterol because
cholesterol is a very So why have we got
it? It's a very vital molecule in the
body. It's without cholesterol we would
die. It's required for maintaining the
integrity of cells and cell membranes.
It's required for hormone production,
right? It has a role in the immune
system. So it's really important vital
molecule in the body. You can change the
profile of the cholesterol. There are
different components. There's something
called triglycerides which is a blood
fat and HDL so called good cholesterol
and LDL through dietary changes but
predominantly it's genetic initially
right so this is a thing so that does
that so so one could then question maybe
those people in those original studies
had genetically high cholesterol but
that doesn't mean the cholesterol was
the problem there may been something
else that hadn't been measured that we
hadn't discovered yet
that was genetic
that was causing the heart disease but
it happened to also beausing causing a
raised LDL. At the same time, people
with low cholesterol, they may have had
something else, right? They may have had
other factors that we now know actually
are linked to heart disease and it's
something to do with the cholesterol. So
that's the first thing. The next
question is um does lowering
cholesterol? So the question to you is
does lowering your LDL make any
difference? And for many many years
there was a mantra that was pushed by
the medical establishment that there was
a linear relationship. The lower your
LDL, the less likely you are to get
heart disease. In fact, there was a a a
commentary written by one of America's
most well-known eminent cardiologists.
He was the editor of the American
Journal of Cardiology. His name was
William Roberts. And he wrote an article
in 2011 to try and push the cholesterol
message further. So more people, most
more people take cholesterol drug
statins. And it was called it's the
cholesterol stupid. And there's a line
in that which I mentioned in my book
where he said you can be an obese
diabetic sedentary smoker
but as long as your cholesterol is low
enough in other words total LDL
cholesterol you will not develop heart
disease. Think about that for a second.
Now I'm just putting that to you Steve.
Now you hearing that what is does that
sound plausible to you?
No.
Right. It doesn't does it. It sounds a
bit strange doesn't it? Right. And I
thought this is odd.
I started looking into this in a lot of
detail probably 2010 partly because
by the end of the by by the late 90s the
people who had discovered the
relationship with very high LDL
cholesterol which is actually by the way
genetically linked to a condition called
familial hyper lipidmia affects one in
250 people right people's cholesterol is
skyhigh
um those people who got the Nobel prize
for this discovery said they predicted
the almost the eradication of heart
disease in the world by the early 2000s
because we had discovered these drugs
called statin drugs that lower
cholesterol and are shown through
clinical trials to prevent heart attacks
and strokes and death which we'll come
on to. Right? So you've got the
combination of that. But before statins
came onto the market and have been
prescribed now to 200 million people,
one of the things that isn't talked
about enough is that there were lots of
trials done. So you've got this
hypothesis now. We think we're right
here. We've discovered that very high
cholesterol in the population has got a
strong link to heart disease. And we've
discovered that very low cholesterol
doesn't give heart disease. But by the
way, what's interesting is for 95% of
the population in the middle, there was
no relationship with who was going to
develop heart disease and who wasn't
depending on the based upon their
cholesterol. Okay. But they thought,
let's develop these drugs to lower
cholesterol and we prevent heart attack.
So all the drug trials, Steve, before
statins came on the market did not show
any benefit. So, you've got the trial
where you've got someone with high
cholesterol and and another person with
high cholesterol. One person gets a
drug, the other person doesn't. You
follow them up. The person on the drug
massively lowers the cholesterol. No
prevention heart attacks over several
years. Like, hold on. What's going on
here? Maybe we did the trial wrong.
Let's try again. Let's try again. Let's
try again. Statins are produced. Okay. A
different type of cholesterol-lowering
drug. And suddenly you start seeing
benefits. Hearts. Oh, great. We've
solved it. Then we can make this case
that the lower cholesterol are better.
Two problems with that. The first one is
that statins actually have other
properties
other than lowering LDL cholesterol.
They are also anti-inflammatory and they
have anti- clotting properties.
What's accepted now is we know heart
disease is a problem is a a is a
clotting problem linked to chronic
inflammation. So it means the benefit of
statins which I will give you in a
second, right? is probably more likely
because of those properties because
other studies when we did other drugs on
cholesterol there was no benefit. Does
that make sense? Am I making sense now?
Yeah. So it's targeting the inflammation
and the clotting.
Exactly. So the question then is what is
the benefit of statins? So the first
thing to say and this is where the
controversy has happened um is that what
I'm about to tell you is again based
upon drug industry sponsored trials
where the raw data on those trials with
the benefits I'm going to tell you has
never been independently verified. So
what I say to patients and I'll say this
to you is what I'm about to tell you is
likely in my opinion an exaggerated
benefit but it's still a benefit. I'm
going to tell you if we trust the drug
companies completely, this is a benefit
you're going to get. Steve, if you've
not had a heart attack, forget about
high cholesterol for a second, right?
This applies to everybody. If you've not
had a heart attack
or you have not been diagnosed with
severe blockages, right? You've not got
that, right? And you would you would
know if you did because you'd get
symptoms of chest pain doing exercise.
Then the benefit of a statin for you
over a fiveyear period at best is one in
100 in preventing you having a nonfatal
heart attack, a nondisabling stroke but
will not prolong your life by one day.
So that's the first thing. Now when you
do studies where you give patient that
information in that transparent way more
than twothirds of them most of them will
and I my experience as well say doc
those odds don't sound great I want to
prevent heart disease but I don't fancy
taking and this is before by the way
we've talked about side effects where
the controversy has happened which I've
been heavily involved in is in my
experience with with patients and also
other data that's out there a large
proportion of patients will suffer
quality let me be clear Here it's not
about serious, right? Quality of life
limiting side effects, right? That means
most commonly fatigue, muscle pain, can
be erectile dysfunction, sleep
disturbance, but stuff that makes you
don't feel you don't feel good like this
is not a good way to live.
[snorts and gasps] The good news is it's
reversible usually within a couple weeks
of stopping the statin or reducing the
dose. Okay. So that controversy uh led
to me publishing an article in the
British Medical Journal in 2013 where me
and another and a Harvard doctor in a
separate article said we we believe that
the side effect rate is probably in the
order of one in five people 20 20% which
is quite high of those sorts of side
effects right [snorts] and that caused a
bit of backlash because the group of
researchers in Oxford who take money
from big farmer who write the guidelines
around the world said this is going to
scare people stop them taking statins
and people will die but that for the
low-risisk people, no one's going to die
because there's no benefit in mortality.
Now, for high-risisk people, those are
people who have had a heart attack.
Um, the benefit of a statin is is
better, Steve. Okay. So, let's say, for
example, some patient comes in, they've
had a heart attack, and I'm telling them
the benefit of the statin if they take
it religiously every day for five uh
five years because that's how long the
trials last where you can give them that
information. The benefit of preventing a
further heart attack is 1 in 39, about
2.5%. 1 in 39 and the benefit in
prolonging their life is 1 in 83.
Right? There's another way of looking at
the stats though based upon again
industry sponsored trials all of the
trials that have been done on statins
and people might ask a question. They
don't often ask this but they may ask
the question how much longer am I going
to live?
Right? Like okay let's just throw this
question to you. Say you've had a heart
attack. You survived a heart attack.
doctor says take this drug and and over
a fiveyear period, how much extra life
ex life life extension would you hope or
hope it would add over that five years?
You can, you know, you can do it over
whatever 20 years, but just say 5 years
to start with. How much longer would you
hope to live from taking that statin?
Okay, so over five years then I'd say um
maybe a year.
Okay.
25% more.
Okay, fine. That sounds that sounds
pretty good.
20% more.
Yeah. Okay.
Um the actual figure not disputed from
industry sponsored trials right
4.2 two days, just over four days.
Is that because they haven't done it
over a long enough period of time?
No. I mean, and then if you then
extrapolate it out, if you presume the
benefits are going to keep going on, you
could then argue, well, over 10 years
it'll be 8 days and over 20 years it'll
be 16 days or whatever, right? So, so
that's the information. So, this the
reason I'm I'm I'm telling you this,
Steve, is that
this information is important. I'm not
just a doctor. I'm a potential patient.
I ask myself, what would I want to know,
right? I am here to try and improve my
quality of life and my health. What is
important to me? What is important to
patients? This information is important
especially Steve because it's not that
I'm saying don't take statins. A lot of
people will say okay I'll take the drug
right and if they don't get side effects
why not you know it might be a bit of a
lottery but why not take the drug and
the people say that to me and that's
fine and if they get side effects but
the thing that's missing Steve is and
this is where we come on to the question
you asked me about how to prevent heart
disease. Is there an alternative that
doesn't give me side effects, improves
my quality of life, and likely is going
to help prevent stop me getting heart
disease? So, what is that?
Lifestyle changes.
Absolutely. So, 80% of heart disease is
linked to environment and lifestyle.
Okay. So what is the the core most
important biological phenomenon in the
body that leads to heart disease which
is not disputed but doesn't get it
doesn't get much of a um there's no
market for the message because there is
no you can't commodify this this is an
interesting thing right so but it's it's
really important information it's called
insulin resistance insulin is a very
important hormone in the body released
by the pancreas helps maintain blood
glucose within certain ranges so our
cells can function optimally all Right?
Over time, if your insulin is
chronically raised too high or if your
cells become resistant to them for
whatever reason, that is the most
important driver of the development of
these so-called plaques, these furring,
these blockages in the arteries.
[snorts]
So, what causes insulin resistance and
how can you combat it or how, you know,
how can you prevent and and potentially,
you know, stabilize and even reverse?
We'll go on to reversal as well because
that's a fascinating area. [gasps]
most important components
diet. Okay, I would say in big figure
terms now probably 50% of heart disease
around the world can be linked to poor
diet.
Okay, so let's start with diet then.
I've actually got a bag of sugar that
I've brought with me because um when I
think about insulin glucose bad diet,
the first thing my my brain thinks about
is sugar. So, I've got this bag of sugar
here that I brought with me. Um, and
I've got two Look at us. We've we've
written sugar on it and covered up the
brand because they didn't pay us. But,
if there is a sugar brand that would
like to do a brand deal, please get in
touch. [laughter]
We're big fans if we need to be. Um,
what I actually would like you to to
show me is how much sugar do I need to
function and to be healthy.
Okay. The amount of sugar that you need
to function and be healthy is zero.
There is no nutritional requirement
whatsoever of of of this what we call
added sugar or table sugar. None at all.
So I don't need any.
You don't need any. And the reason for
that is very briefly our bodies need
glucose to survive. But you don't need
any dietary source of glucose to
survive. Right? Because your people go
on what we call ketogenic diets and they
literally eliminate all starch as well
which also contains glucose um from
their diet. Your body will make it
itself from fat and protein. So in terms
of diet, there is no value from sugar
whatsoever. It can give you energy of
course, yes, but you can get energy from
other things, but there's no nutritional
value whatsoever. Zero. So from a from a
health perspective, there is zero
requirement for dietary sugar.
So when we say that Americans are
consuming a lot of sugar every day, are
we talking about added sugar? Yeah,
we're talking about so the way that so
the World Health Organization now
um after I was involved in this
campaign, you know, and there was a lot
of attention on it, they revise their
guidelines. So they recommend a maximum
limit for the average adult of actually
six teaspoons of either um so maximum
limit, okay, which you don't need it,
but maximum limit because after that
that's when the health consequences
start to accumulate. One,
two,
3,
4,
5,
six.
Okay. So, that's the maximum daily
limit.
Maximum daily limit. Okay. But just to
give you an example, that's not let's so
one sugary drink, we don't name any
brands, right? You would have to would
often a 330 mil let's say the most
famous sugary drink uh in the world
I have no idea who you're talking about
would have nine teaspoons on top nine
spoons in one of those right and that's
just in the 330 mil imagine going to the
cinema and having half a liter whatever
else right
Jesus so one can of beep um has nine
teaspoons of sugar in it which is
which is so four yeah absolutely so four
grams is one teaspoon
okay which is well above the daily
recommended daily maximum one chocolate
bar.
Yeah.
Like a standard size chocolate bar. What
we grew up with
about the same.
Leave leave chocolate out of it.
Right. [laughter] Well, listen, you
know, dark chocolate. I love chocolate,
right? Have you know um for children,
the US Department of Agriculture, for
the average 4 to 8year-old child, think
about kids as well. They're the most
vulnerable to a lot of this pro these
problems of sugar. They recommend a
maximum limit of three teaspoons.
Yeah. Now the average person in this
country in America is consuming at least
20 teaspoons. Now when we talk about
sugar we're talking about world health
they they the word they use is free
sugars. So it means this sort of sugar
added right to foods. Um but it also
includes fruit juice,
honey and syrups.
same effect on your body. The that I
fruit, whole fruit is fine, but if you
think about it, um a glass of orange
juice, for example, would usually have
the uh the juice of six oranges.
Okay?
You couldn't eat six oranges that
easily. You'd have one orange, for
example. And there's fiber, and the
fiber does has a counteracting effect on
terms of the way that the um the glucose
and fructose is affected absorbed in
your body. A lot of it's to do with the
rapid increase in the bloodstream of
blood glucose and and that causes huge
spikes in insulin. And the problem with
that over time, of course, is you get
chronically raised insulin and heart
disease. But also, interestingly, the
more rapidly you have a food that causes
a glucose spike, the more quickly you're
going to get a crash because insulin
goes up quite quickly and it causes to
come down and it drives hunger.
Yeah.
So, that's another problem. So, the food
industry, I think, knew for a long time.
That's why you know in America and it
may be similar here 70% of foods
purchased in supermarket in America will
have added sugar because they knew that
it increases the palatability and the
consumption. Of course they're there to
sell food not look after your health.
So you said 20 teaspoons is the average
for an American.
At least 20 is probably much higher.
I'm going to have I'm going to have to
ask you to show us that.
Yeah.
So I can see what that looks like in a
glass.
It's disgusting. That's disgusting when
you see it like that. And you don't you
don't realize that you're having that
much sugar in a day. But I mean,
technically that's what two cans of
fizzy drink.
Yeah. Yeah. But the thing is a lot of
the sugar that's being consumed are in
foods that people wouldn't think have
sugar in them. They're not the usual
junk food, your cakes and biscuits and
whatever else, you know. Um they're in
things even marketed as being healthy.
Low-fat foods, etc., low-fat yogurts.
So, could you just summarize what we
have here then? These two glasses.
Yeah. So this is the maximum daily
recommended limit by the World Health
Organization of sugar consumption after
which you then start to see increases
risks of disease. Um and this is what at
least I think what most people are
consuming at the moment.
Are you hopeful that there's something
we can do about this [snorts] at a
society level? Well, I think one
important step was the fact that we in,
you know, this levy on sugary drinks
definitely would have some um impact
partly based upon what we learned from
big tobacco. You know, Steve, you know,
50% of it's interesting, crazy when you
think about it now. In 1970, 50% of
adults in the UK were smokers, right?
We've got that down to about 17% now,
but massive reduction, right? And it
happened. Education was important, but
the real the real intervention that had
more
um impact than anything else was
actually taxation of cigarettes. And it
had twofold effect. Of course, you make
it a little bit more expensive. You
know, you know this with your business
background, right? It's going to reduce
the the consumption, but it was a way of
also increasing awareness that this is
harmful. So, I think that the sugar
stuff is ongoing and I think a lot of
people have awareness on it. I think now
which is linked to sugar the and I've
written about this we need to treat
ultrarocessed food which a lot of the
ultrarocessed food has added sugar as
the new tobacco
right this is more than 50% of the
calories in the UK and more than 60% of
the calories in the US is of people's
daily consumption is coming from
ultrarocessed foods essentially
described as if it comes out of a packet
industrially produced and you can read
more than five ingredients usually with
additives and preservatives, it's
ultrarocessed and best avoided. And all
of the research that's been done only
points in one direction. And I think
there are at least 32 different
conditions or diseases now that are
associated with the consumption of
ultrarocessed food. That is the major
issue. So because this is a
predominantly an environmental problem,
right? Our our our food our food
environment is saturated with this
stuff. Even hospitals, Steve, I mean I
the first campaign I got involved with
is trying to get this stuff out of
hospital. I was like, hold on. We're
treating patients with obesity related
conditions, yet we're serving them junk
food in hospitals. The staff, 50% of NHS
staff are overweight or obese.
What's the probability that if I'm, cuz
I want to talk about ultressed foods as
well as the shoes, what's the
probability that if I'm having that much
sugar a day, the big glass, that I'm
going to end up in your practice with
some kind of heart disease.
I I wouldn't be able to give you a
figure, but you're definitely
significantly increasing your risk.
Well, if that's the average American,
then what's the average American's
chance of ending up in I guess causation
needs to be established.
Yeah, of course. And it depends what
else they're having as well. But but
it's definitely putting them at
significant increased risk of type 2
diabetes. I think the figure now in
America, if I'm not wrong, is that a
third to a half of adult Americans now
are um pre-diabetic.
um the the broad so to answer your
question in in a better way because
we're already there unfortunately
um the way to
understand insulin resistance on a
personal level in terms of measurements
body measurements is something called
metabolic health and there are five
components which are very easy to
measure of metabolic health okay um it's
your waist circumference
right it's your blood triglycerides
which is a form of the cholesterol being
above 1.7 mill moles. Okay. Um, it's
your HDL cholesterol, the good
cholesterol being less than 1 mill.
It's being pre-diabetic. Okay. Having a
HBA1C of more than 5.7%.
Um, or being prehypertensive, so your
blood pressure is above 120 over 80
average. If you have um three of those
that are abnormal, you have something
called metabolic syndrome. puts you at
the highest risk of heart disease and at
least 50% if not more patients admitted
with heart attacks will have metabolic
syndrome. But all those five parameters
being in the normal range in America
only one in eight adults have all of
those in the normal range and only one
in four people aged between 20 and 40.
Think about that for a second.
So seven out of eight yes adults will
have abnormal metabolic health. If we
within a year, if we just shifted a
little bit people's eating habits and
let's say we eliminated ultrarocessed
food, we got people to eat more nuts and
seeds, oily fish, you know, whole fruit
and vegetables, it's been estimated that
you would half the death rates from
heart disease within globally within one
year from 20 million to 10 million.
You'd be out of business
as a heart doctor.
Um,
there's still be a lot of people to
treat. We got to help the other 10
million as well, right? But but I think
the other thing as well is um what it
does Steve though is it shifts the age.
So instead of someone having saying a
dying prematurely having a heart attack
at the age of say 65, you know, they'll
live to 85. So all we'll be doing as
doctors is we'll be managing older
people. But that's fine. You know, we've
improved longevity, improved quality of
life as well.
You refer to stress as a silent killer.
It's something we're not addressing, I
think, as a society. So, to give put it
in perspective, when you look at risk
factor for heart disease, risk factors
for heart disease, um the major ones are
smoking, type two diabetes, high blood
pressure. The risk of heart disease
linked to stress, chronic stress of more
than a moderate degree is actually the
same as being a smoker or having high
blood pressure or having type two
diabetes. And most people, I think, are
not managing it. And certainly of all
the patients I see, all the heart
patients I see, invariably all of them
have had over the preceding years before
their heart attack stress stress levels
that are quite high. What's the
mechanism?
So
from an evolutionary perspective,
if we were acute stress can be a
lifesaver, right? If we were running
away from a saber-tooth tiger, right?
Then what happens is the body produces
clotting factors and inflammatory
markers uh factors in the blood that if
we were attacked they help reduce the
risk of us bleeding to death. So imagine
now imagine that happening chronic
stress. You've got a lowgrade what we
call chronic inflammation and clotic
factors increase. And that's been shown
actually in proven in um a study that
was published in the Lancet a few years
ago where they did an MRI of the brain
of of young healthy people, adults, and
they followed them up but they looked at
the their subjective stress score. They
did like um questionnaires to measure
their stress levels subjectively. They
correlated that with looking at the
amygdala in the brain which is the
emotional center and then they looked at
clotting factors and they even looked at
heart attacks further down the line and
there was a perfect correlation with the
subjective stress score the amydala
lighting up the clotting factors in the
blood the inflammatory markers in the
blood and heart attack. So we we've got
the plausible mechanism. So if that's
the case Steve there must be a way of
curbing it and well how does one do
that? Well, the two most important
causes of stress in society are work and
relationship stress. So, those are
things people can potentially work on,
right? Potentially, but it's just be
aware of it. But one of the
interventions that I use with my
patients um is actually breath work and
meditation.
And one of the most extraordinary bits
of research that I came across
and it's in our documentary as well
because we go into a bit more detail on
it. I had to go and see it for myself to
believe it actually properly believe it.
um a cardiologist in India for more than
20 years has been um through a lifestyle
approach has been reversing heart
disease. So he did a study called the
Mount Abu that is a place in northern
India uh where he's got a huge community
in a hospital people come to see him
there and um he puts him through this
lifestyle plan which in this study was
that you know they're devout Hindus so
it was a high fiber vegetarian diet it
was two 30-minute brisk walks a day okay
and something called Raj yoga meditation
for 40 minutes
which is a form of breath work but it's
also a bit of a spiritual transformation
as well it's about understanding where
your anger comes from and all that kind
of So it goes quite deep. And anyway, he
followed these people up who were
diagnosed with at least 50 to 70%
blockages in their arteries. They had
heart disease. For some reason, they
didn't want to have a um a bypass
operation or a stent or they couldn't
afford it and they wanted this lifestyle
plan. So he put them on a lifestyle
plan. He repeated their angagrams after
2 years, right? He looked at the
arteries again and on the people that
had adeared to the plan, there was an
average reduction of the blockage of
20%.
70% became 50, 50 became 30. This is
unheard of. If you ask any cardiologist,
can heart disease reverse saying, "No,
I've never even seen it. It's not
possible, right?" But he showed this to
be the case. He then looked at his data
a bit in a bit more detail and said,
"Was it the diet? Was it the exercise,
the two or was it the stress reduction?"
The only of course they're all
important, but the only independent
factor for the reversal of the blockages
was 40 minutes of Raj Yoga meditation
per day.
Now I asked him, you know, he published
this data in what we call a um an
observational study. It wasn't what we
call a randomized trial where it was
just more rigorously done. And he said,
"Why have you not done the randomized
trial?" Said, "I have years ago." And he
showed me the data. And I was like,
"Wow, why didn't you publish this
anywhere? I couldn't get it published."
He invited and I could be wrong about
it. It was a it was senior it was a
senior cardiology society. can't
remember if the American Heart
Association but it was a scenist cardio
society in America
to um he invited them to India so he
could present his data he presented his
data to them and they basically thought
it was fascinating but in between the
lines they said to him you know we can't
publish this because it will affect our
stent business
and what's a stent business
stent is basically the heart stance like
as in it would you know I remember Steve
when I first um wrote an article the
first sort mainstream media article I
wrote with in 2011
was me it was in the Observer newspaper
I'd met Jamie Oliver having written to
him saying can you sort hustle food out
and then I end up writing an article
called I mend hearts then I see our
hospitals serve junk food to my patients
uh basically saying listen we're going
to tackle this obesity epidemic tackle
heart disease we need to sort the diet
out and I remember one of the
cardiologists um who I knew a senior
cardiologist I was still a junior doctor
at this point kind of tongue and cheek
but many truths spoken in just said it
seem this is going to affect our our
business our stent business as in
operating on people as if it was a bad
thing that I was saying that we should
basically prevent heart disease right
there's a cultural problem here Steve
honestly I'm not this is this is a this
is a um a dirty secret if you like
within medicine unfortunately amongst
establishment figures is that they have
become so wedded and so close to these
tyrannical corporations or their own
self-interest that you know we're
missing a big trick here in terms of
what we can really do for patients.
In part, your other book here that I
have, I still can't pronounce this word.
Pop
popy diet. Pop.
Your popy diet, I guess, serves to
address many of these issues and to make
sure that our heart hearts stay healthy.
What I wanted you to do for me is if I'm
endeavoring to have a a good heart
health until I die, which I guess is
kind of impossible, but maybe I'll get
hit by a truck or something. Um, if I'm
endeavoring to have good heart health,
what should my daily rout in an optimal
situation? What should my daily routine
look like if I follow
the diet that you came up with, but also
if I'm thinking through all of the
potential things that can cause bad
health?
Sleep.
I wake up. So, I sleep for seven hours.
So, at least 7 hours sleep. Great. Tick.
Okay.
Um, eating real food.
Okay. So, breakfast is how many how many
meals a day should I have? Well, two to
three, whatever suits you. When you feel
hungry, eat till you're full.
Not seven, eight, nine, not
no just eat, you know, and also I
suppose if you're doing activity, then
you may, but the most important thing is
to avoid the ultrarocessed food and not
to have too much starch.
What about fasting?
Um, controversial area, mixed data. Um,
I think that in terms of, you know, I
have patients who feel benefit from
fasting and other people feel more
stressed. It depends where you are in
your life. If for example you're very
active and your sleep isn't good
actually fasting can make your stress
levels worse which is not good. It
causes cortisol to increase and there is
some data showing that happens. So it
depends where you are but I'm not averse
to fasting. It depends you know see how
people feel.
Okay. So I've woken up. I've had seven
hours of sleep. I've eaten breakfast
which was whole foods. So
yeah and and Okay. So I would say you
know whole fruit and vegetables ideally
um a mixture of of low sugar fruits if
you can ideally you know berries mixed
berries for example
if you can get at least five to seven
portions in that's great
um the the foods that are thought so the
the anti-inflammatory foods that have
got a reasonable body of evidence behind
them are things like extravirgin olive
oil is your base fat okay nuts and seeds
tree nuts almonds walnuts um hazelnuts
for example
oily fish at least a couple of times a
week,
right? And then I would say minimizing,
you know, the starch and the sugar,
okay?
And the rest of it doesn't matter. You
can have, you know, I have heart
patients ask me whether they can eat a
steak. I say absolutely it's not going
to cause, you know, it's very
nutritious. If you want to have a steak
two or three times a week, no issue.
Saturated fat in the diet isn't a
problem. I busted that myth. So butter,
cheese, for example, um red meat is not
going to have any adverse effect on your
heart.
Okay. So I've eaten my breakfast. You
want to enjoy your food as well, right?
Yeah. So, that's my sleep taking care of
my meals that day taken care of.
What else do I need to be thinking about
to optimize heart health?
Well, I suppose you got to think about
what level it's very subjective. You
know, if you're stressed
and if you're stressed, then you need to
think about what can you do about it.
And there are different things. Some
people find exercise um is good. Some
people do yoga, they do pilatees, some
people do breath work. So, try and find
I have an app called Calm which I listen
to. I I do at least 20 to 30 sometimes
40 minutes of breath work every morning
when I wake up. It's the first thing I
do. Actually,
I'm going to do both. I'm going to do
breath work and I'm going to go for a
long workout.
Could is there such such a thing as too
much exercise?
Yeah. Unfortunately, yes. About 11% of
elite athletes by the time they reach 50
will have scans that show very severe
blockages or a heart disease, right? Um,
and I think Steve, to be honest, it
might be genetic predisposition, but I
think a lot of those people, cuz I have
some of these people coming to me who
don't know why they've got diagnosed
with heart disease. And I remember one
lady I saw a few months ago, and she was
running something like
something crazy like 5 to 10 miles a
day, but on only 4 hours sleep, and she
was young and otherwise didn't have a
diabetes or anything else, but had heart
disease, had developed heart disease.
And I said, "This is probably because of
this." So uh I think that when you look
at heart disease and optimal levels of
exercise, it is actually the one thing I
think the guidelines are right about is
probably that 150 minutes of moderate
activity a week. So you know I again I I
follow my own advice and I [snorts] will
um you know I I used to run but you know
running can be quite damaging to the
knees especially as you get older. So I
I cycle and do exercise bike and
whatever else and I will get my heart
rate to about 115 beats a minute for 30
minutes you know five times a week. One
study found that marathon runners
experience a frequency of heart attacks
and strokes similar to people who
already have heart disease suggesting
too much exercise is harmful which is in
your book statinfree. And um another
stat here is athletes who do more than
one hour of intense exercise per day,
four times um have four times the
frequency of breathing infections per
year compared to those who do moderate
activity.
Well, that's the other thing about
overex exercising. Well, it depresses
the immune system. That's well known. Uh
and in fact if you look at and a lot of
people do it for different reasons but
if you look at the the communities
around the world known as the blue zones
Steve you know where people have high
longevity. These people weren't pounding
it in the gym. They're just outside you
know they were gardening they were
moving. You don't need to be doing all
of that kind of stuff. People do it for
different reasons. I mean I I do it
sometime. Oh also for mental health it's
good.
You um didn't you publish an article?
You co-authored an article for the
British Journal of Sports and Medicine
called It's Time to Bust the Myth of
Physical Activity.
Yeah. Physical inactivity and obesity.
You can't outrun a bad diet. That was
the title of the article. And the point
was, and we make it very clear at the
beginning, that exercise has many
benefits for health, but weight loss is
not one of them. Because most of what
determines your weight gain, almost all
of it is to do with with what you eat.
And that discussion or that thinking,
whether it was about burning calories
actually came from the food industry.
They they they they manufactured that.
Um Coca-Cola, McDonald's, they would
push this. They even the Olympic Games
2012, they were the main sponsors,
right? because for them they want to
distract from their unhealthy products
and say well the obesity epidemic is
being driven by people not you know not
exercising.
So on that day on this perfect day that
I'm creating in my mind I'm eating well
I've moved but not too much. I'm doing
breath work in the morning. I've slept 7
hours a day and the last thing that from
looking at your 21-day immunity plan is
socializing.
Yeah. So so important. I think one of
the most important aspects for mental
health, physical health is the quality
of our relationships, friends, family.
Um people may laugh at this, but I
actually I actually prescribe hugging to
a lot of my patients. Uh especially
couples, you know. Um there is
definitely some benefits from that, you
know, uh and uh in terms of reducing
cortisol levels, etc. I think that's an
an issue in society in general. You know
we become we have been conditioned in a
way to think that we can just be
dependent on ourselves as individuals
and we don't need other people but
actually we do this is that's how we
evolved partly because it helps us it
helps us feel safe
hugging
I think it just it just yeah there is it
activates parts of the brain the
protection soothing mechanisms of the
brain and I think that is just an extra
element of it absolutely
and they it reduces cortisol and all
those things so it's going to stave
heart attacks. If we hug, we have less
chance of having a heart attack.
It's not not just about that. I think
it's also good for the immune system. So
the the people that did the original
cold studies on on cold viruses, this
was done, I think, in early 2000s.
Fascinating study. They inoculated
people with a cold virus. So they put
the the traditional cold virus whatever
into into people's, you know, nasal
passages and they looked at who
developed symptoms of a cold and who
didn't. And they looked and and before
they did that, they did these
questionnaires based upon several
different aspects of people's social
life. Are they involved in community
activities? How often do they meet their
friends? What's it like with their
partner? Etc., etc. And the people who
had the highest scores, only one in
three of those people developed a cold.
And the people on the other side that
were more maybe more lonely and weren't
interacting with other people who didn't
have good quality relationships, two out
of three of those people developed
colds.
So, it's not just about heart disease,
it's about the immune system as well.
Overall health
makes you think, doesn't it, if
loneliness really is killing us. Yeah.
Um,
we need to try and do more to end the
epidemic that is loneliness cuz the
stats seem to suggest it's going one way
and it's not a good way.
Um, and part of that issue as well,
Steve, which is a something we need to
think about with what's going on society
[snorts] is I do we've got a worsening
mental health crisis. We've got less
trust in government. One of the ways
societies progress is people being able
to trust each other by people not being
afraid to speak the truth. And more than
ever, and certainly I've seen it in
medicine, we have got to a situation and
the COVID vaccine is a microcosm of
something much bigger where people are
afraid to speak the truth. And that
gives us an element of uncertainty,
distrust, and it makes us more stressed.
So what this means, what it comes back
to is ultimately part of the solution to
the mental, physical, social well-being
crisis, heart disease is thinking about
acting from a place of virtue and
ethics, right? Thinking about, you know,
your intentions, being honest, not
manipulating other people for money.
This is unfortunately where the the the
capitalist system or the current
economic system has taken us and the
corporatization of human beings as a
result. And that is very detrimental to
our physical and mental health.
What was your father's name?
Kash.
Kash. Son, never change your loyalties.
Yeah, loyalty was very important to him.
You know, those I was brought with those
core values about um honesty, integrity,
being loyal to people, how to be a good
human being, how to be the best version
of yourself, Steve. Um, that's what it's
about, you know, for your benefit and
for the benefit of others.
He said that to you when you were
younger and you were considering
switching football team. Um, he told you
to never change your loyalties. And you
des I've got the eulogy you wrote for
your father when he passed away here.
And it's interesting some of the the
words and phrases that you used in the
eulogy to him because they seem to be
quite pertinent to our conversation
today. The ultimate purpose of knowledge
is to reduce human suffering. And that
true wisdom
to achieve that end only comes from
dialogue.
Yeah, that was uh that was a Socratic
Socrates quote. True wisdom comes only
from dialogue. Um,
understanding others starts from
understanding oneself. And to get to a
greater truth, one has to be able to
question one's own beliefs. And to get
there, to achieve that, you have to
engage uh with other people and have
discussions. but from a place of
compassion where you are open to
listening to other people because we can
only get to a greater truth if you
listen to all different sides on a
particular issue and that comes from
having that conversation. So I think
that's a huge component of it all which
I think we're losing Steven society
there's so much polarization you know.
Yeah, and that's yeah, I completely
agree and you know it's it's difficult
obviously because um conversation can be
fatal. It can be um especially medical
conversation conversation about things
like vaccines or health information. So
it's very delicate information but um
the what can also be fatal is the lack
of conversation i.e. not seeing ideas
collide. And it's it's interesting as
someone who speaks to a lot of health
professionals on this podcast, I'm not
an expert in health and people will
often criticize me for that and say, you
know, um this they said this thing wrong
or this thing wrong. But I think the
place that I've got to now is to present
every opinion that I can.
Yeah.
And hopefully to will people to be able
to make up their own minds. And I hope I
tried to uh present some of the other
side of um the at least the rebuttals so
people can can be curious and we don't
we're not pushing in any particular
direction. I have no bloody dog in the
fight. I don't you know
and I'm not I want to have that
conversation, Steve. I think part of the
problem with all of this is that that
conversation isn't even happening. We
want to have that conversation. We want
rebuttals. We want a count of view.
Yeah.
But the ignoring of even the
conversation that for me is is is
unforgivable.
It's a shame. I think podcasts are doing
a good job of kind of well I think a lot
of them are doing a good job of just
having that conversation.
Yeah.
Um because it's long form and there's I
mean there's a there's a comment section
so people are going to discuss below and
there's you know there's lots of podcast
there's lots of information being thrown
out into the world and um everything
we've talked about today will be linked
below as much of the the links as we
can. So, if anybody is curious about
anything we've discussed or any stats,
you'll send me your stuff. Absolutely.
And I'll link it below and I'll I'll
link the NHS and the British Heart
Foundation and anyone else below so
people can have a think about that. But
I am a big fan of conversation and I'm a
big fan of having both sides of an
argument and trying to make my own mind
up on things and find the nuance. I find
the truth is usually somewhere in the
middle. Yeah.
So, I think it's important because, you
know, one of the things I think we have
to we have to reflect on is some of
those amazing people you talked about
like Martin Luther King and I don't know
whether it's the suffragettes or Gandhi
or whoever it might be, their ideas in
their time were received equally
horrifically and um now those are things
that we all consider to be true and very
important as it relates to maybe science
or just social issues on equality. So
with that in mind, we have to also be
humble to the fact that idea that might
be important might at first offend us.
It might trigger us. It might be counter
to the public narrative or or to the
current available science. But I don't
think it should be censored.
No. And I I would say that people
listening to this just think about one
thing. One of the reasons that we seek
the truth and greater truths is that a
life lived in darkness has no meaning.
Amen. We have a closing tradition on
this podcast where the last guest leaves
a question for the next guest not
knowing who they're going to be leaving
it for. And the question left for you is
of all the most amazing superstar people
you have met in your life,
what was the quality that made them
superstars? And can it be taught?
A love for humanity.
That was a quality that made them
superstars in whatever they were doing.
It was to give back to society in some
way. Whether it was entertainment,
whether it was music, whether it was
sport, but based upon a love for
humanity.
Stands up to be true. I just went
through a list of superstars that I know
of in my brain and I think that's
certainly the case. And it's funny cuz
the people that I think of as real
superstars aren't necessarily famous.
They're not rich. They're not anything
like that. They're just like the best
people, the ones that I really aspire to
be more like. But the one that made them
stand out for me, the one quality that
made them extra special in th those
particular people um was despite them
being so excellent is they had a huge uh
um a wonderful humility about them
and they can find you everywhere,
especially on Twitter. Got a big Twitter
following. Um
and your books as well. I will link your
books below in the description for
anybody that wants to read them. I've
these two books in particular, the one
that I can't pronounce, the
Pop Pop diet,
a 21-day lifestyle plan. Lose weight,
feel great, and drastically reduce your
risk of type two diabetes and heart
disease, and a statin-free life, a
revolutionary life plan for tackling
heart disease without the use of statins
are two that I'd certainly really,
really recommend. Thank you, Dr. Thank
you for the work you do, the way that
you do your work, and thank you for
having the courage to be a [snorts] loud
counteracting voice in society where we
do need counteracting voices. I don't
think anybody can ever argue with that.
And the way in which you do it and your
intentions of doing it, I think are
wonderful. Um, and I think they're a
real credit to the two wonderful people
that raised you. So, thank you for your
time today. Thank you for doing the work
that you do. I'm going to continue
following it. I follow you on Twitter
and I've been following you for many,
many years, I think, I believe. Um, and
I very much enjoy consuming your
information because I know that you
don't you have there's a certain
fearlessness with you that is going to
deliver what is true regardless of
consequence. And that is a useful source
of information to have in my world where
I'm I'm trying to advance my thinking
and I care more about progress and truth
than I do something feeling comfortable.
So, I highly recommend everyone go check
you out on Twitter as well. [music]
Heat. Heat. N.
[music]
Heat. Heat. [music]
[singing]
[music]